CHAPTER XX. A FRESH DAY DAWNS.


Old Oliver and Tony saw their darling buried in a little grave in a
cemetery miles away from their own home, and then they returned, desolate
and bereaved, to the deserted city, which seemed empty indeed to them.
The house had never looked so very dark and dreary before. Yet from time
to time old Oliver forgot that Dolly was gone altogether, and could never
come back; for he would call her in his eager, quavering tones, or search
for her in some of the hiding-places, where she had often played at
hide-and-seek with him. When mealtimes came round he would put out
Dolly's plate and cup, which had been bought on purpose for her, with gay
flowers painted upon them; and in the evening, over his pipe, when he had
been used to talk to his Lord, he now very often said nothing but repeat
again and again Dolly's little prayer, which he had himself taught her,
"Gentle Jesus, meek and mild." It was quite plain to Tony that it would
never do to leave him alone in his house and shop.

"I've give up my place as errand-boy," he said to Mr. Ross, "'cause the
old master grows worse and worse for forgetting, and I must mind shop for
him now as well as I can. He's not off his head, as you may say; he's
sharp enough sometimes; but there's no trusting to him being sharp
always. He talks to Dolly as if she was here, and could hear him, till I
can't hardly bear it. But I'm very fond of him,--fonder of him than
anythink else, 'cept my little Dolly; and I've made up my mind as his
Master shall be my master, and he's always ready to tell me all he knows
about him. I'm no ways afeared of not getting along."

Tony found that they got along very well. Mr. Ross made a point of going
in to visit them every week, and of seeing how the business prospered in
the boy's hands; and he put as much as he could in his way. Sad and
sorrowful as the days were, they passed over, one after another, bringing
with them at least the habit of living without Dolly. Every Sunday
afternoon, however, old Oliver and Tony walked slowly through the
streets, for the old man could only creep along with Tony's help, till
they reached the Children's Hospital; but they never passed the door, nor
entered in through it. Old Oliver would stand for a few minutes leaning
heavily on Tony's shoulder, and trembling from head to foot, as his eyes
wandered over all the front of the building; and then a low, wailing cry
would break from his lips, "Dear Lord! there was no room for my little
love, but thou hast found room for her!"

It was a reopening of Tony's sorrow when Aunt Charlotte came up from the
country to find that the little child had gone away altogether, leaving
only her tiny frocks and clothes, which were neatly folded up in a
drawer, where old Oliver treasured up a keepsake or two of his wife's.
She discovered, too, that old Oliver had forgotten to write to
Susan,--indeed, his hand had become too trembling to hold a pen,--and she
wrote herself; but her letter did not reach Calcutta before Susan and her
husband had left it, being homeward bound.

It was as nearly two years as it could well be since the summer evening
when Susan Raleigh had sent her little girl into old Oliver's shop,
bidding her be a good girl till she came home, and thinking it would be
only three days before she saw her again. It was nearly two years, and an
evening something like it, when the door was darkened by the entrance of
a tall, fine-looking man, dressed as a soldier, but with one empty sleeve
looped up across his chest. Tony was busy behind the counter wrapping up
magazines, which he was going to take out the next morning, and the
soldier looked very inquisitively at him.

"Hallo! my lad, who are you?" he asked, in a tone of surprise.

"I'm Antony Oliver," he said; for of late he had taken to call himself by
his old master's name.

"Antony Oliver!" repeated the stranger; "I never heard of you before."

"Well, I'm only Tony," he answered; "but I live with old Mr. Oliver now,
and call him grandfather. He likes it, and it does me good. It's like
somebody belonging to me."

"Why! how long have you called him grandfather?" asked the soldier again.

"Ever since our little Dolly died," said Tony, in a faltering voice.

"Dolly dead!" exclaimed the man, looking ready to fall down; for his
face went very white, and he leaned upon the counter with his one hand.
"Oh! my poor Susan!--my poor, dear girl!--however can I tell her this
bad news?"

"Who are you?" cried Tony. "Are you Dolly's father? Oh, she's dead!
She died last January, and we are more lonesome without her than you
can think."

"Let me see poor Susan's father," he said, after a minute or two, and
with a very troubled face.

"Ay, come in," said Tony, lifting up the flap of the counter, under which
Dolly had so often played at hide-and-seek. "He's more hisself again; but
his memory's bad yet. I know everythink about her, though; because she
was so fond of me, and me of her. Come in."

Raleigh entered the room, and saw old Oliver sitting in his arm-chair,
with a pipe in his hand, and a very tranquil look upon his wrinkled face.
The gas-light shone upon the glittering epaulettes and white sash of the
soldier, and the old man fastened upon him a very keen, yet doubtful gaze
of inquiry.

"Don't you know me, father?" cried Raleigh, almost unable to utter a
word. "It's your poor Susan's husband, and Dolly's father."

"Dolly's father!" repeated old Oliver, rising from his chair, and
resting his hand upon Raleigh's shoulder. "Do you know that the dear Lord
has taken her to be where he is in glory?"

"Yes, I know it," he said, with a sob.

He put the old man back in his seat, and drew a chair close up to him.
They sat thus together in sorrowful silence for some minutes, until old
Oliver laid his hand upon the empty sleeve on Raleigh's breast.

"You've lost your arm," he said, pityingly.

"Ay!" answered Raleigh; "our colonel was set upon by a tiger in the
jungle, and I saved him; but the brute tore my arm, and craunched
the bone between his teeth till it had to come off. It's spoiled me
for a soldier."

"Yes, yes, poor fellow," answered old Oliver, "but the Lord knew all
about it."

"That he did," answered Raleigh; "and he's taught me a bit more about
himself than I used to know. I'm not spoiled to be His soldier. But I
don't know much about the service yet, and I shall want you to teach me,
father. You'll let me call you father, for poor Susan's sake, won't you?"

"To be sure--to be sure," said old Oliver, keeping his hand still upon
the empty sleeve on Raleigh's breast.

"Well, father," he continued, "as I am not fit for a soldier, and as the
colonel was hurt too, we're all come home together. Only Susan's gone
straight on with her lady and our little girl, and sent me through London
to see after you and Dolly."

"Your little girl?" said Oliver questioningly.

"Yes, the one born in India. Her name's Mary, but we call her Polly.
Susan said it made her think of our little Dolly at home. Dear! dear! I
don't know however I shall let her know."

Another fit of silence fell upon them, and Tony left them together, for
it was time to put up the shop shutters. It seemed just like the night
when he had followed Susan and the little girl, and loitered outside in
the doorway opposite, to see what would happen after she had left her in
the shop. He fancied he was a ragged, shoeless boy again, nobody loving
him, or caring for him, and that he saw old Oliver and Dolly standing on
the step, looking out for the mother, who had gone away, never, never to
see her darling again. Tony's heart was very full; and when he tried to
whistle, he was obliged to give it up, lest he should break out into sobs
and crying. When he went back into the house Raleigh was talking again.

"So Susan and me are to have one of the lodges of the colonel's park,"
he said, "and I'm to be a sort of bailiff to look after the other outdoor
servants about the garden and premises. It's a house with three bedrooms,
and a very pleasant sort of little parlour, as well as a kitchen and
scullery place downstairs. You can see the Wrekin from the parlour
window, and the moon over it; and it's not so far away but what we could
get a spring-cart sometimes, and drive over to your old home under the
Wrekin. As soon as ever the colonel's lady told Susan where it was, she
cried out, 'That's the very place for father!' You'd like to come and
live with your own Susan again, in your own country; wouldn't you now?"

"Yes, yes; for a little while," answered old Oliver, with a smile
upon his face.

Tony felt a strange and very painful shrinking at his heart. If the old
man went away to live with his daughter in the country, his home would be
lost to him, and he would have to go out into the great city again alone,
with nobody to love. He could get his living now in a respectable manner,
and there was no fear of his being driven to sleep in Covent Garden, or
under the bridges. But he would be alone, and all the links which bound
him to Dolly and old Oliver would be snapped asunder. He wondered if the
Lord Jesus would let such a thing be.

"But I couldn't leave Tony," cried old Oliver, suddenly; and putting on
his spectacles to look for him.

"Come here, Tony. He's like my own son to me, bless him! He calls me
grandfather, and kept my heart up when I should have sunk very low
without him. My Master gave him to me the very same night he gave me my
little love. No, no; Dolly loved Tony, and Susan must come here to see
me, but I could never leave my boy."

Old Oliver had put his arm round Tony, drawing him closer and closer to
him as he spoke, until his withered cheek pressed fondly against his
face. Since Dolly died neither of them had felt such a thrill of
happiness as now.

"The colonel and his lady must be told about this," said Raleigh, after
he had heard all that Tony had been and done for old Oliver; and when he
was obliged to go away for the night, the soldier gave him such a cordial
grasp of the hand, as set all his fingers tingling, and his heart
throbbing with exultation.




