CHAPTER XII. TONY'S WELCOME.


Almost without knowing where his feet were carrying him, Tony sauntered
through the streets until he found himself at the turn into the alley
within a few yards of Oliver's home, and his beloved Dolly. At any rate
he could pass down it, and, if the shop-door was not shut, he would wrap
his beautiful silver coin in a rag, and throw it into the inside; they
would be sure to guess who had done it, and what it was for. It was dark
down the alley, only one lamp and the greengrocer's gas lighting it up,
and Tony stole along quietly in the shadow. It was nearly time for Dolly
to be going to bed, he thought, and old Oliver was sure to be with her in
the inner room; but just as he came into the revealing glare of the
greengrocer's stall, his ears rang and his heart throbbed violently at
the sound of a shrill little scream of gladness, and the next moment he
felt himself caught by Dolly's arms, and dragged into the house by them.

"Tony's come home, Tony's come home, gan-pa!" she shouted with all her
might. "Dolly's found Tony at last!"

Dolly's voice quivered, and broke down into quick, childish sobs, while
she held Tony very fast, lest he should escape from her once again; and
old Oliver came quickly from the room beyond, and laid his hand fondly
upon the boy's shoulder.

"Why have you kept away from us so long, Tony?" he asked.

"Oh, master!" he cried, "I've been a wicked boy, and a miserable boy. Do
forgive me, and I'll never do so no more. I s'pose you'll never let me
sleep under the counter again?"

"Come in, come in!" answered Oliver, pushing him gently before him into
the house. "We've been waiting and watching for you every night, me and
my little love. You ought not to have served us so, my lad; but we're too
glad to be angry with you. Charlotte's sharp, and she's very much afraid
of low ways and manners; but she isn't a hard woman, and she didn't know
anything about you. When I told her as you'd been left no bigger than my
little love here to take care of yourself, alone, in London,--mother
dead, and no father,--she shed tears about you, she did. And she left you
the biggest of her eggs to be kept for your supper, with her kind love;
and we've put it by for you. You shall have it this very night. Dolly, my
love, bring me the little saucepan."

"I'm not so clean as I could wish," said Tony, mournfully; for he had
neglected himself during the last week, and looked very much like what he
had done when he had first seen old Oliver and his little grand-daughter.

"Take a bowl full of water into the shop, then," answered Oliver, "and
wash yourself, while I boil the egg. Dolly'll find you a bit of soap and
a towel; she's learning to be grand-pa's little housekeeper, she is."

When Tony returned to the kitchen he looked a different being; the gloom
was gone as well as the grime. He felt as if he had come to himself after
a long and very miserable dream. Here was old Oliver again, looking at
him with a kindly light in his dim eyes, and Dolly dancing about, with
her pretty merry little ways; and Beppo wagging his tail in joyous
welcome, as he sniffed round and round him. Even the egg was a token of
forgiveness and friendliness. That terrible old woman was not his enemy,
after all. He recollected what she had said he must do, and he resolved
to do it for Dolly's sake, and old Oliver's. He would learn to read and
write, and he would pinch himself hard to buy some better clothing, lest
he should continue to be a disgrace to them; shoes he must have first of
all, as those were what the sharp but friendly old woman had particularly
mentioned. At any rate, he could never run away again from this home,
where he was so loved and cared for.

Oliver told him how sadly Dolly had fretted after him, and watched for
him at the door, hour after hour, to see him come home again. He said
that in the same way, only with a far greater longing and love, his
Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, was waiting for Tony to go to him. He
could not half understand it, but a vague feeling of a love passing all
understanding sank deeply into his heart. He fell asleep that night under
the counter with the tranquil peacefulness of one who has been tossed
about in a great storm and tempest, and has been brought safely to the
desired haven.




