CHAPTER IX. A NEW BROOM AND A CROSSING.


The morning was a fine soft, sunny December day, such as comes sometimes
after a long season of rain and fog, and Tony proposed taking Dolly out
for a walk through the streets, to which Oliver gladly consented, as it
would give to him exactly the undisturbed leisure he needed for writing
his letter to Charlotte. But Dolly was not in her usual spirits; on the
contrary, she was grave and sober, and at length Tony, thinking she was
tired, sat down on a door-step, and took her upon his knee, to tell her
his dream of the wonderful broom which swept beautifully all by itself.
Dolly grew more and more pensive after hearing this, and sat silent for a
long time, with her small head resting thoughtfully upon her hand, as she
looked up and down the street.

"Dolly 'ud like to buy a boom," she said, at last, "a great, big boom;
and gan-pa 'ill smoke his pipe again to-night. Dolly's growing a big
girl; and me must be a good girl till mammy comes back. Let us go and buy
a big boom, Tony."

For a few minutes Tony tried to shake her resolution, and persuade her
to change her mind. He even tempted her with the sight of a doll in a
shop-window; but she remained steadfast, and he was not sorry to give in
at last. Since the idea had entered his head that the money had been
given to him for the purpose of buying a broom, he had rather regretted
parting with it, and he felt some anxiety lest he should not be allowed
a second chance. Dolly's light-heartedness had returned, and she
trotted cheerfully by his side as they walked on in search of a shop
where they could make their purchase. It was some time before they
found one, and they had already left behind them the busier
thoroughfares, and had reached a knot of quieter streets where there
were more foot-passengers, for the fine morning had tempted many people
out for pleasure as well as business. Tony was particular in his choice
of a broom, but once bought, he carried it over his shoulder, and went
on his way with Dolly in triumph.

They were passing along chattering busily, when Tony's eyes fell upon a
child about as old as Dolly, standing on the kerb-stone with a lady, who
looked anxiously across to the other side of the broad and very dirty
road, for the day before had been rainy. They were both finely dressed,
and the little girl had on new boots of shining leather, which it was
evident she was very much afraid of soiling. For a minute Tony only
looked on at their perplexity, but then he went up to them, holding Dolly
by the hand.

[A NEW BROOM AND A CROSSING]

"If you'll take care of my little girl," he said, "I'll carry your
little girl across the road. I'm wery clean for a street-boy, all but my
feet, 'cos I've got this little girl to take care of; and I'll do it
wery gentle."

Both the lady and the child looked very searchingly into Tony's face. It
was pale and meagre; but there was a pleasant smile upon it, and his
eyes shone down upon the two children with a very loving light in them.
The lady took Dolly's hand in hers, nodding permission for him to carry
her little child over to the other side, and she waited for him to come
back to his own charge. Then she took out her purse, and put twopence
into his hand.

"Thank ye, my lady," said Tony; "but I didn't do it for that. I'm only
looking out for a crossing. Me and Dolly have bought this broom, and I'm
looking out for a place to make a good crossing in."

"Why not make one here?" asked the lady.

It seemed a good place to try one in; there were four roads meeting, and
a cab-stand close by. Plenty of people were passing to and fro, and the
middle of the road was very muddy. Tony begged a wisp of straw from a
cabman, to make a seat for Dolly in the sunshine under a blank bit of
wall, while he set to work with a will, feeling rather pleased than not
that the broom would not sweep of itself. A crossing was speedily made,
and for two or three hours Tony kept it well swept. By that time it was
twelve o'clock, and Dolly's dinner would be ready for her before they
could reach home, if old Oliver had not forgotten it. It seemed a great
pity to leave his new post so early. Most passers-by, certainly, had
appeared not to see him at all; but he had already received fivepence
halfpenny, chiefly in halfpence, from ladies who were out for their
morning's walk; and Dolly was enjoying herself very much in the sunshine,
receiving all the attention which he could spare from his crossing.
However a beginning was made. The broom and the crossing were his
property; and Tony's heart, beat fast with pride and gladness as he
carried the weary little Dolly all the way home again. He resolved to put
by half of his morning's earnings towards replacing the fourpenny-piece
she had given back to him; or perhaps he would buy her a beautiful doll,
dressed like a real lady.




