CHAPTER XV. BLUSHING HONOURS


It was rather late the next morning when Ventimore opened his eyes, to
discover the Jinnee standing by the foot of his bed. "Oh, it's _you_, is
it?" he said sleepily. "How did you--a--get on last night?"

"I gained such information as I desired," said Fakrash, guardedly; "and
now, for the last time, I am come to ask thee whether thou wilt still
persist in refusing to wed the illustrious Bedeea-el-Jemal? And have a
care how thou answerest."

"So you haven't given up the idea?" said Horace. "Well, since you make
such a point of it, I'll meet you as far as this. If you produce the
lady, and she consents to marry me, I won't decline the honour. But
there's one condition I really _must_ insist on."

"It is not for thee to make stipulations. Still, yet this once I will
hear thee."

"I'm sure you'll see that it's only fair. Supposing, for any reason, you
can't persuade the Princess to meet me within a reasonable time--shall
we say a week?----"

"Thou shalt be admitted to her presence within twenty-four hours," said
the Jinnee.

"That's better still. Then, if I don't see her within twenty-four hours,
I am to be at liberty to infer that the negotiations are off, and I may
marry anybody else I please, without any opposition from you? Is that
understood?"

"It is agreed," said Fakrash, "for I am confident that Bedeea will
accept thee joyfully."

"We shall see," said Horace. "But it might be as well if you went and
prepared her a little. I suppose you know where to find her--and you've
only twenty-four hours, you know."

"More than is needed," answered the Jinnee, with such childlike
confidence, that Horace felt almost ashamed of so easy a victory. "But
the sun is already high. Arise, my son, put on these robes"--and with
this he flung on the bed the magnificent raiment which Ventimore had
last worn on the night of his disastrous entertainment--"and when thou
hast broken thy fast, prepare to accompany me."

"Before I agree to that," said Horace, sitting up in bed, "I should like
to know where you're taking me to."

"Obey me without demur," said Fakrash, "or thou knowest the
consequences."

It seemed to Horace that it was as well to humour him, and he got up
accordingly, washed and shaved, and, putting on his dazzling robe of
cloth-of-gold thickly sewn with gems, he joined Fakrash--who, by the
way, was similarly, if less gorgeously, arrayed--in the sitting-room, in
a state of some mystification.

"Eat quickly," commanded the Jinnee, "for the time is short." And
Horace, after hastily disposing of a cold poached egg and a cup of
coffee, happened to go to the windows.

"Good Heavens!" he cried. "What does all this mean?"

He might well ask. On the opposite side of the road, by the railings of
the square, a large crowd had collected, all staring at the house in
eager expectation. As they caught sight of him they raised a cheer,
which caused him to retreat in confusion, but not before he had seen a
great golden chariot with six magnificent coal-black horses, and a suite
of swarthy attendants in barbaric liveries, standing by the pavement
below. "Whose carriage is that?" he asked.

"It belongs to thee," said the Jinnee; "descend then, and make thy
progress in it through the City."

"I will not," said Horace. "Even to oblige you I simply can't drive
along the streets in a thing like the band-chariot of a travelling
circus."

"It is necessary," declared Fakrash. "Must I again recall to thee the
penalty of disobedience?"

"Oh, very well," said Horace, irritably. "If you insist on my making a
fool of myself, I suppose I must. But where am I to drive, and why?"

"That," replied Fakrash, "thou shalt discover at the fitting moment."
And so, amidst the shouts of the spectators, Ventimore climbed up into
the strange-looking vehicle, while the Jinnee took his seat by his side.
Horace had a parting glimpse of Mr. and Mrs. Rapkin's respective noses
flattened against the basement window, and then two dusky slaves mounted
to a seat at the back of the chariot, and the horses started off at a
stately trot in the direction of Rochester Row.

"I think you might tell me what all this means," he said. "You've no
conception what an ass I feel, stuck up here like this!"

"Dismiss bashfulness from thee, since all this is designed to render
thee more acceptable in the eyes of the Princess Bedeea," said the
Jinnee.

Horace said no more, though he could not but think that this parade
would be thrown away.

But as they turned into Victoria Street and seemed to be heading
straight for the Abbey, a horrible thought occurred to him. After all,
his only authority for the marriage and decease of Bedeea was the
"Arabian Nights," which was not unimpeachable evidence. What if she were
alive and waiting for the arrival of the bridegroom? No one but Fakrash
would have conceived such an idea as marrying him to a Jinneeyeh in
Westminster Abbey; but he was capable of any extravagance, and there
were apparently no limits to his power.

"Mr. Fakrash," he said hoarsely, "surely this isn't my--my wedding day?
You're not going to have the ceremony _there_?"

"Nay," said the Jinnee, "be not impatient. For this edifice would be
totally unfitted for the celebration of such nuptials as thine."

As he spoke, the chariot left the Abbey on the right and turned down the
Embankment. The relief was so intense that Horace's spirits rose
irrepressibly. It was absurd to suppose that even Fakrash could have
arranged the ceremony in so short a time. He was merely being taken for
a drive, and fortunately his best friends could not recognise him in his
Oriental disguise. And it was a glorious morning, with a touch of frost
in the air and a sky of streaky turquoise and pale golden clouds; the
broad river glittered in the sunshine; the pavements were lined with
admiring crowds, and the carriage rolled on amidst frantic enthusiasm,
like some triumphal car.

"How they're cheering us!" said Horace. "Why, they couldn't make more
row for the Lord Mayor himself."

"What is this Lord Mayor of whom thou speakest?" inquired Fakrash.

"The Lord Mayor?" said Horace. "Oh, he's unique. There's nobody in the
world quite like him. He administers the law, and if there's any
distress in any part of the earth he relieves it. He entertains monarchs
and Princes and all kinds of potentates at his banquets, and altogether
he's a tremendous swell."

"Hath he dominion over the earth and the air and all that is therein?"

"Within his own precincts, I believe he has," said Horace, rather
lazily, "but I really don't know precisely how wide his powers are." He
was vainly trying to recollect whether such matters as sky-signs,
telephones, and telegraphs in the City were within the Lord Mayor's
jurisdiction or the County Council's.

Fakrash remained silent just as they were driving underneath Charing
Cross Railway Bridge, when he started perceptibly at the thunder of the
trains overhead and the piercing whistles of the engines. "Tell me," he
said, clutching Horace by the arm, "what meaneth this?"

"You don't mean to say," said Horace, "that you have been about London
all these days, and never noticed things like these before?"

"Till now," said the Jinnee, "I have had no leisure to observe them and
discover their nature."

"Well," said Horace, anxious to let the Jinnee see that he had not the
monopoly of miracles, "since your days we have discovered how to tame or
chain the great forces of Nature and compel them to do our will. We
control the Spirits of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, and make them give
us light and heat, carry our messages, fight our quarrels for us,
transport us wherever we wish to go, with a certainty and precision that
throw even your performances, my dear sir, entirely into the shade."

Considering what a very large majority of civilised persons would be as
powerless to construct the most elementary machine as to create the
humblest kind of horse, it is not a little odd how complacently we
credit ourselves with all the latest achievements of our generation.
Most of us accept the amazement of the simple-minded barbarian on his
first introduction to modern inventions as a gratifying personal
tribute: we feel a certain superiority, even if we magnanimously refrain
from boastfulness. And yet our own particular share in these discoveries
is limited to making use of them under expert guidance, which any
barbarian, after overcoming his first terror, is quite as competent to
do as we are.

It is a harmless vanity enough, and especially pardonable in Ventimore's
case, when it was so desirable to correct any tendency to "uppishness"
on the part of the Jinnee.

"And doth the Lord Mayor dispose of these forces at his will?" inquired
Fakrash, on whom Ventimore's explanation had evidently produced some
impression.

"Certainly," said Horace; "whenever he has occasion."

The Jinnee seemed engrossed in his own thoughts, for he said no more
just then.

They were now nearing St. Paul's Cathedral, and Horace's first suspicion
returned with double force.

"Mr. Fakrash, answer me," he said. "Is this my wedding day or not? If it
is, it's time I was told!"

"Not yet," said the Jinnee, enigmatically, and indeed it proved to be
another false alarm, for they turned down Cannon Street and towards the
Mansion House.

"Perhaps you can tell me why we're going through Victoria Street, and
what all this crowd has come out for?" asked Ventimore. For the throng
was denser than ever; the people surged and swayed in serried ranks
behind the City police, and gazed with a wonder and awe that for once
seemed to have entirely silenced the Cockney instinct of _persiflage_.

"For what else but to do thee honour?" answered Fakrash.

"What bosh!" said Horace. "They mistake me for the Shah or somebody--and
no wonder, in this get-up."

"Not so," said the Jinnee. "Thy names are familiar to them."

Horace glanced up at the hastily improvised decorations; on one large
strip of bunting which spanned the street he read: "Welcome to the
City's most distinguished guest!" "They can't mean me," he thought; and
then another legend caught his eye: "Well done, Ventimore!" And an
enthusiastic householder next door had burst into poetry and displayed
the couplet--


    "Would we had twenty more
    Like Horace Ventimore!"


"They _do_ mean me!" he exclaimed. "Now, Mr. Fakrash, _will_ you kindly
explain what tomfoolery you've been up to now? I know you're at the
bottom of this business."

It struck him that the Jinnee was slightly embarrassed. "Didst thou not
say," he replied, "that he who should receive the freedom of the City
from his fellow-men would be worthy of Bedeea-el-Jemal?"

"I may have said something of the sort. But, good heavens! you don't
mean that you have contrived that _I_ should receive the freedom of the
City?"

"It was the easiest affair possible," said the Jinnee, but he did not
attempt to meet Horace's eye.

"Was it, though?" said Horace, in a white rage. "I don't want to be
inquisitive, but I should like to know what I've done to deserve it?"

"Why trouble thyself with the reason? Let it suffice thee that such
honour is bestowed upon thee."

By this time the chariot had crossed Cheapside and was entering King
Street.

"This really won't do!" urged Horace. "It's not fair to me. Either I've
done something, or you must have made the Corporation _believe_ I've
done something, to be received like this. And, as we shall be in the
Guildhall in a very few seconds, you may as well tell me what it is!"

"Regarding that matter," replied the Jinnee, in some confusion, "I am
truly as ignorant as thyself."

As he spoke they drove through some temporary wooden gates into the
courtyard, where the Honourable Artillery Company presented arms to
them, and the carriage drew up before a large marquee decorated with
shields and clustered banners.

"Well, Mr. Fakrash," said Horace, with suppressed fury, as he alighted,
"you have surpassed yourself this time. You've got me into a nice
scrape, and you'll have to pull me through it as well as you can."

"Have no uneasiness," said the Jinnee, as he accompanied his _protégé_
into the marquee, which was brilliant with pretty women in smart frocks,
officers in scarlet tunics and plumed hats, and servants in State
liveries.

Their entrance was greeted by a politely-subdued buzz of applause and
admiration, and an official, who introduced himself as the Prime Warden
of the Candlestick-makers' Company, advanced to meet them. "The Lord
Mayor will receive you in the library," he said. "If you will have the
kindness to follow me----"

Horace followed him mechanically. "I'm in for it now," he thought,
"whatever it is. If I can only trust Fakrash to back me up--but I'm
hanged if I don't believe he's more nervous than I am!"

As they came into the noble Library of the Guildhall a fine string band
struck up, and Horace, with the Jinnee in his rear, made his way through
a lane of distinguished spectators towards a dais, on the steps of
which, in his gold-trimmed robes and black-feather hat, stood the Lord
Mayor, with his sword and mace-bearers on either hand, and behind him a
row of beaming sheriffs.

A truly stately and imposing figure did the Chief Magistrate for that
particular year present: tall, dignified, with a lofty forehead whose
polished temples reflected the light, an aquiline nose, and piercing
black eyes under heavy white eyebrows, a frosty pink in his wrinkled
cheeks, and a flowing silver beard with a touch of gold still lingering
under the lower lip: he seemed, as he stood there, a worthy
representative of the greatest and richest city in the world.

Horace approached the steps with an unpleasant sensation of weakness at
the knees, and no sort of idea what he was expected to do or say when he
arrived.

And, in his perplexity, he turned for support and guidance to his
self-constituted mentor--only to discover that the Jinnee, whose
short-sightedness and ignorance had planted him in this present false
position, had mysteriously and perfidiously disappeared, and left him to
grapple with the situation single-handed.




