CHAPTER VIII. BACHELOR'S QUARTERS


Horace was feeling particularly happy as he walked back the next evening
to Vincent Square. He had the consciousness of having done a good day's
work, for the sketch-plans for Mr. Wackerbath's mansion were actually
completed and despatched to his business address, while Ventimore now
felt a comfortable assurance that his designs would more than satisfy
his client.

But it was not that which made him so light of heart. That night his
rooms were to be honoured for the first time by Sylvia's presence. She
would tread upon his carpet, sit in his chairs, comment upon, and
perhaps even handle, his books and ornaments--and all of them would
retain something of her charm for ever after. If she only came! For even
now he could not quite believe that she really would; that some untoward
event would not make a point of happening to prevent her, as he
sometimes doubted whether his engagement was not too sweet and wonderful
to be true--or, at all events, to last.

As to the dinner, his mind was tolerably easy, for he had settled the
remaining details of the _menu_ with his landlady that morning, and he
could hope that without being so sumptuous as to excite the Professor's
wrath, it would still be not altogether unworthy--and what goods could
be rare and dainty enough?--to be set before Sylvia.

He would have liked to provide champagne, but he knew that wine would
savour of ostentation in the Professor's judgment, so he had contented
himself instead with claret, a sound vintage which he knew he could
depend upon. Flowers, he thought, were clearly permissible, and he had
called at a florist's on his way and got some chrysanthemums of palest
yellow and deepest terra-cotta, the finest he could see. Some of them
would look well on the centre of the table in an old Nankin
blue-and-white bowl he had; the rest he could arrange about the room:
there would just be time to see to all that before dressing.

Occupied with these thoughts, he turned into Vincent Square, which
looked vaster than ever with the murky haze, enclosed by its high
railings, and under a wide expanse of steel-blue sky, across which the
clouds were driving fast like ships in full sail scudding for harbour
before a storm. Against the mist below, the young and nearly leafless
trees showed flat, black profiles as of pressed seaweed, and the sky
immediately above the house-tops was tinged with a sullen red from miles
of lighted streets; from the river came the long-drawn tooting of tugs,
mingled with the more distant wail and hysterical shrieks of railway
engines on the Lambeth lines.

And now he reached the old semi-detached house in which he lodged, and
noticed for the first time how the trellis-work of the veranda made,
with the bared creepers and hanging baskets, a kind of decorative
pattern against the windows, which were suffused with a roseate glow
that looked warm and comfortable and hospitable. He wondered whether
Sylvia would notice it when she arrived.

He passed under the old wrought-iron arch that once held an oil-lamp,
and up a short but rather steep flight of steps, which led to a brick
porch built out at the side. Then he let himself in, and stood
spellbound with perplexed amazement,--for he was in a strange house.

In place of the modest passage with the yellow marble wall-paper, the
mahogany hat-stand, and the elderly barometer in a state of chronic
depression which he knew so well, he found an arched octagonal
entrance-hall with arabesques of blue, crimson, and gold, and
richly-embroidered hangings; the floor was marble, and from a shallow
basin of alabaster in the centre a perfumed fountain rose and fell with
a lulling patter.

"I must have mistaken the number," he thought, quite forgetting that his
latch-key had fitted, and he was just about to retreat before his
intrusion was discovered, when the hangings parted, and Mrs. Rapkin
presented herself, making so deplorably incongruous a figure in such
surroundings, and looking so bewildered and woebegone, that Horace, in
spite of his own increasing uneasiness, had some difficulty in keeping
his gravity.

"Oh, Mr. Ventimore, sir," she lamented; "whatever _will_ you go and do
next, I wonder? To think of your going and having the whole place done
up and altered out of knowledge like this, without a word of warning! If
any halterations were required, I _do_ think as me and Rapkin had the
right to be consulted."

Horace let all his chrysanthemums drop unheeded into the fountain. He
understood now: indeed, he seemed in some way to have understood almost
from the first, only he would not admit it even to himself.

The irrepressible Jinnee was at the bottom of this, of course. He
remembered now having made that unfortunate remark the day before about
the limited accommodation his rooms afforded.

Clearly Fakrash must have taken a mental note of it, and, with that
insatiable munificence which was one of his worst failings, had
determined, by way of a pleasant surprise, to entirely refurnish and
redecorate the apartments according to his own ideas.

It was extremely kind of him; it showed a truly grateful
disposition--"but, oh!" as Horace thought, in the bitterness of his
soul, "if he would only learn to let well alone and mind his own
business!"

However, the thing was done now, and he must accept the responsibility
for it, since he could hardly disclose the truth. "Didn't I mention I
was having some alterations made?" he said carelessly. "They've got the
work done rather sooner than I expected. Were--were they long over it?"

"I'm sure I can't tell you, sir, having stepped out to get some things I
wanted in for to-night; and Rapkin, he was round the corner at his
reading-room; and when I come back it was all done and the workmen gone
'ome; and how they could have finished such a job in the time beats me
altogether, for when we 'ad the men in to do the back kitchen they took
ten days over it."

"Well," said Horace, evading this point, "however they've done this,
they've done it remarkably well--you'll admit that, Mrs. Rapkin?"

"That's as may be sir," said Mrs. Rapkin, with a sniff, "but it ain't
_my_ taste, nor yet I don't think it will be Rapkin's taste when he
comes to see it."

It was not Ventimore's taste either, though he was not going to confess
it. "Sorry for that, Mrs. Rapkin," he said, "but I've no time to talk
about it now. I must rush upstairs and dress."

"Begging your pardon, sir, but that's a total unpossibility--for they've
been and took away the staircase.'

"Taken away the staircase? Nonsense!" cried Horace.

"So _I_ think, Mr. Ventimore--but it's what them men have done, and if
you don't believe me, come and see for yourself!"

She drew the hangings aside, and revealed to Ventimore's astonished gaze
a vast pillared hall with a lofty domed roof, from which hung several
lamps, diffusing a subdued radiance. High up in the wall, on his left,
were the two windows which he judged to have formerly belonged to his
sitting-room (for either from delicacy or inability, or simply because
it had not occurred to him, the Jinnee had not interfered with the
external structure), but the windows were now masked by a perforated
and gilded lattice, which accounted for the pattern Horace had noticed
from without. The walls were covered with blue-and-white Oriental tiles,
and a raised platform of alabaster on which were divans ran round two
sides of the hall, while the side opposite to him was pierced with
horseshoe-shaped arches, apparently leading to other apartments. The
centre of the marble floor was spread with costly rugs and piles of
cushions, their rich hues glowing through the gold with which they were
intricately embroidered.

"Well," said the unhappy Horace, scarcely knowing what he was saying,
"it--it all looks very _cosy_, Mrs. Rapkin."

"It's not for me to say, sir; but I should like to know where you
thought of dining?"

"Where?" said Horace. "Why, here, of course. There's plenty of room."

"There isn't a table left in the house," said Mrs. Rapkin; "so, unless
you'd wish the cloth laid on the floor----"

"Oh, there must be a table somewhere," said Horace, impatiently, "or you
can borrow one. Don't _make_ difficulties, Mrs. Rapkin. Rig up anything
you like.... Now I must be off and dress."

He got rid of her, and, on entering one of the archways, discovered a
smaller room, in cedar-wood encrusted with ivory and mother-o'-pearl,
which was evidently his bedroom. A gorgeous robe, stiff with gold and
glittering with ancient gems, was laid out for him--for the Jinnee had
thought of everything--but Ventimore, naturally, preferred his own
evening clothes.

"Mr. Rapkin!" he shouted, going to another arch that seemed to
communicate with the basement.

"Sir?" replied his landlord, who had just returned from his
"reading-room," and now appeared, without a tie and in his
shirt-sleeves, looking pale and wild, as was, perhaps, intelligible in
the circumstances. As he entered his unfamiliar marble halls he
staggered, and his red eyes rolled and his mouth gaped in a cod-like
fashion. "They've been at it 'ere, too, seemin'ly," he remarked huskily.

"There have been a few changes," said Horace, quietly, "as you can see.
You don't happen to know where they've put my dress-clothes, do you?"

"I don't 'appen to know where they've put nothink. Your dress clothes?
Why, I dunno where they've bin and put our little parler where me and
Maria 'ave set of a hevenin' all these years regular. I dunno where
they've put the pantry, nor yet the bath-room, with 'ot and cold water
laid on at my own expense. And you arsk me to find your hevenin' soot! I
consider, sir, I consider that a unwall--that a most unwarrant-terrible
liberty have bin took at my expense."

"My good man, don't talk rubbish!" said Horace.

"I'm talking to you about what _I know_, and I assert that an
Englishman's 'ome is his cashle, and nobody's got the right when his
backsh turned to go and make a 'Ummums of it. Not _nobody_ 'asn't!"

"Make a _what_ of it?" cried Ventimore.

"A 'Ummums--that's English, ain't it? A bloomin' Turkish baths! Who do
you suppose is goin' to take apartments furnished in this 'ere
ridic'loush style? What am I goin' to say to my landlord? It'll about
ruing me, this will; and after you bein' a lodger 'ere for five year and
more, and regarded by me and Maria in the light of one of the family.
It's 'ard--it's damned 'ard!"

"Now, look here," said Ventimore, sharply--for it was obvious that Mr.
Rapkin's studies had been lightened by copious refreshment--"pull
yourself together, man, and listen to me."

"I respeckfully decline to pull myshelf togerrer f'r anybody livin',"
said Mr. Rapkin, with a noble air. "I shtan' 'ere upon my dignity as a
man, sir. I shay, I shtand 'ere upon----" Here he waved his hand, and
sat down suddenly upon the marble floor.

"You can stand on anything you like--or can," said Horace; "but hear
what I've got to say. The--the people who made all these alterations
went beyond my instructions. I never wanted the house interfered with
like this. Still, if your landlord doesn't see that its value is
immensely improved, he's a fool, that's all. Anyway, I'll take care
_you_ shan't suffer. If I have to put everything back in its former
state, I will, at my own expense. So don't bother any more about
_that_."

"You're a gen'l'man, Mr. Ventimore," said Rapkin, cautiously regaining
his feet. "There's no mishtaking a gen'l'man. _I'm_ a gen'l'man."

"Of course you are," said Horace genially, "and I'll tell you how you're
going to show it. You're going straight downstairs to get your good wife
to pour some cold water over your head; and then you will finish
dressing, see what you can do to get a table of some sort and lay it for
dinner, and be ready to announce my friends when they arrive, and wait
afterwards. Do you see?"

"That will be all ri', Mr. Ventimore," said Rapkin, who was not far gone
enough to be beyond understanding or obeying. "You leave it entirely to
me. I'll unnertake that your friends shall be made comforrable, perfelly
comforrable. I've lived as butler in the besht, the mosht ecxlu--most
arishto--you know the sort o' fam'lies I'm tryin' to r'member--and--and
everything was always all ri', and _I_ shall be all ri' in a few
minutes."

With this assurance he stumbled downstairs, leaving Horace relieved to
some extent. Rapkin would be sober enough after his head had been under
the tap for a few minutes, and in any case there would be the hired
waiter to rely upon.

If he could only find out where his evening clothes were! He returned to
his room and made another frantic search--but they were nowhere to be
found; and as he could not bring himself to receive his guests in his
ordinary morning costume--which the Professor would probably construe as
a deliberate slight, and which would certainly seem a solecism in Mrs.
Futvoye's eyes, if not in her daughter's--he decided to put on the
Eastern robes, with the exception of a turban, which he could not manage
to wind round his head.

Thus arrayed he re-entered the domed hall, where he was annoyed to find
that no attempt had been made as yet to prepare a dinner-table, and he
was just looking forlornly round for a bell when Rapkin appeared. He had
apparently followed Horace's advice, for his hair looked wet and sleek,
and he was comparatively sober.

"This is too bad!" cried Horace; "my friends may be here at any moment
now--and nothing done. You don't propose to wait at table like that, do
you?" he added, as he noted the man's overcoat and the comforter round
his throat.

"I do not propose to wait in any garments whatsoever," said Rapkin; "I'm
a-goin' out, I am."

"Very well," said Horace; "then send the waiter up--I suppose he's
come?"

"He come--but he went away again--I told him as he wouldn't be
required."

"You told him that!" Horace said angrily, and then controlled himself.
"Come, Rapkin, be reasonable. You can't really mean to leave your wife
to cook the dinner, and serve it too!"

"She ain't intending to do neither; she've left the house already."

"You must fetch her back," cried Horace. "Good heavens, man, _can't_ you
see what a fix you're leaving me in? My friends have started long
ago--it's too late to wire to them, or make any other arrangements."

There was a knock, as he spoke, at the front door; and odd enough was
the familiar sound of the cast-iron knocker in that Arabian hall.

"There they are!" he said, and the idea of meeting them at the door and
proposing an instant adjournment to a restaurant occurred to him--till
he suddenly recollected that he would have to change and try to find
some money, even for that. "For the last time, Rapkin," he cried in
despair, "do you mean to tell me there's no dinner ready?"

"Oh," said Rapkin, "there's dinner right enough, and a lot o' barbarious
furriners downstairs a cookin' of it--that's what broke Maria's 'art--to
see it all took out of her 'ands, after the trouble she'd gone to."

"But I must have somebody to wait," exclaimed Horace.

"You've got waiters enough, as far as that goes. But if you expect a
hordinary Christian man to wait along of a lot o' narsty niggers, and be
at their beck and call, you're mistook, sir, for I'm going to sleep the
night at my brother-in-law's and take his advice, he bein' a doorkeeper
at a solicitor's orfice and knowing the law, about this 'ere business,
and so I wish you a good hevening, and 'oping your dinner will be to
your liking and satisfaction."

He went out by the farther archway, while from the entrance-hall Horace
could hear voices he knew only too well. The Futvoyes had come; well, at
all events, it seemed that there would be something for them to eat,
since Fakrash, in his anxiety to do the thing thoroughly, had furnished
both the feast and attendance himself--but who was there to announce the
guests? Where were these waiters Rapkin had spoken of? Ought he to go
and bring in his visitors himself?

These questions answered themselves the next instant, for, as he stood
there under the dome, the curtains of the central arch were drawn with a
rattle, and disclosed a double line of tall slaves in rich raiment,
their onyx eyes rolling and their teeth flashing in their chocolate-hued
countenances, as they salaamed.

Between this double line stood Professor and Mrs. Futvoye and Sylvia,
who had just removed their wraps and were gazing in undisguised
astonishment on the splendours which met their view.

Horace advanced to receive them; he felt he was in for it now, and the
only course left him was to put as good a face as he could on the
matter, and trust to luck to pull him through without discovery or
disaster.




