CHAPTER XVI. A KILLING FROST


Fortunately for Ventimore, the momentary dismay he had felt on
finding himself deserted by his unfathomable Jinnee at the very
outset of the ceremony passed unnoticed, as the Prime Warden of the
Candlestick-makers' Company immediately came to his rescue by briefly
introducing him to the Lord Mayor, who, with dignified courtesy, had
descended to the lowest step of the dais to receive him.

"Mr. Ventimore," said the Chief Magistrate, cordially, as he pressed
Horace's hand, "you must allow me to say that I consider this one of the
greatest privileges--if not _the_ greatest privilege--that have fallen
to my lot during a term of office in which I have had the honour of
welcoming more than the usual number of illustrious visitors."

"My Lord Mayor," said Horace, with absolute sincerity, "you really
overwhelm me. I--I only wish I could feel that I had done anything to
deserve this--this magnificent compliment!"

"Ah!" replied the Lord Mayor, in a paternally rallying tone. "Modest, my
dear sir, I perceive. Like all truly great men! A most admirable trait!
Permit me to present you to the Sheriffs."

The Sheriffs appeared highly delighted. Horace shook hands with both of
them; indeed, in the flurry of the moment he very nearly offered to do
so with the Sword and Mace bearers as well, but their hands were, as it
happened, otherwise engaged.

"The actual presentation," said the Lord Mayor, "takes place in the
Great Hall, as you are doubtless aware."

"I--I have been given to understand so," said Horace, with a sinking
heart--for he had begun to hope that the worst was over.

"But before we adjourn," said his host, "you will let me tempt you to
partake of some slight refreshment--just a snack?"

Horace was not hungry, but it occurred to him that he might get through
the ceremony with more credit after a glass of champagne; so he accepted
the invitation, and was conducted to an extemporised buffet at one end
of the Library, where he fortified himself for the impending ordeal with
a _caviare_ sandwich and a bumper of the driest champagne in the
Corporation cellars.

"They talk of abolishing us," said the Lord Mayor, as he took an anchovy
on toast; "but I maintain, Mr. Ventimore--I maintain that we, with our
ancient customs, our time-honoured traditions, form a link with the
past, which a wise statesman will preserve, if I may employ a somewhat
vulgar term, untinkered with."

Horace agreed, remembering a link with a far more ancient past with
which he devoutly wished he had refrained from tinkering.

"Talking of ancient customs," the Lord Mayor continued, with an odd
blend of pride and apology, "you will shortly have an illustration of
our antiquated procedure, which may impress you as quaint."

Horace, feeling absolutely idiotic, murmured that he felt sure it would
do that.

"Before presenting you for the freedom, the Prime Warden and five
officials of the Candlestick-makers' Company will give their testimony
as compurgators in your favour, making oath that you are 'a man of good
name and fame,' and that (you will be amused at this, Mr.
Ventimore)--that you 'do desire the freedom of this city, whereby to
defraud the Queen or the City.' Ha, ha! Curious way of putting it, is it
not?"

"Very," said Horace, guiltily, and not a little concerned on the
official's account.

"A mere form!" said the Lord Mayor; "but I for one, Mr. Ventimore--I for
one should be sorry to see the picturesque old practices die out. To my
mind," he added, as he finished a _pâté de foie gras_ sandwich, "the
modern impatience to sweep away all the ancient landmarks (whether they
be superannuated or not) is one of the most disquieting symptoms of the
age. You won't have any more champagne? Then I think we had better be
making our way to the Great Hall for the Event of the Day."

"I'm afraid," said Horace, with a sudden consciousness of his
incongruously Oriental attire--"I'm afraid this is not quite the sort of
dress for such a ceremony. If I had known----"

"Now, don't say another word!" said the Lord Mayor. "Your costume is
very nice--very nice indeed, and--and most appropriate, I am sure. But I
see the City Marshal is waiting for us to head the procession. Shall we
lead the way?"

The band struck up the March of the Priests from _Athalie_, and Horace,
his head in a whirl, walked with his host, followed by the City Lands
Committee, the Sheriffs, and other dignitaries, through the Art Gallery
and into the Great Hall, where their entrance was heralded by a flourish
of trumpets.

The Hall was crowded, and Ventimore found himself the object of a
popular demonstration which would have filled him with joy and pride if
he could only have felt that he had done anything whatever to justify
it, for it was ridiculous to suppose that he had rendered himself a
public benefactor by restoring a convicted Jinnee to freedom and society
generally.

His only consolation was that the English are a race not given to
effusiveness without very good reason, and that before the ceremony was
over he would be enabled to gather what were the particular services
which had excited such unbounded enthusiasm.

Meanwhile he stood there on the crimson-draped and flower-bedecked dais,
bowing repeatedly, and trusting that he did not look so forlornly
foolish as he felt. A long shaft of sunlight struck down between the
Gothic rafters, and dappled the brown stone walls with patches of gold;
the electric lights in the big hooped chandeliers showed pale and feeble
against the subdued glow of the stained glass; the air was heavy with
the scent of flowers and essences. Then there was a rustle of
expectation in the audience, and a pause, in which it seemed to Horace
that everybody on the dais was almost as nervous and at a loss what to
do next as he was himself. He wished with all his soul that they would
hurry the ceremony through, anyhow, and let him go.

At length the proceedings began by a sort of solemn affectation of
having merely met there for the ordinary business of the day, which to
Horace just then seemed childish in the extreme; it was resolved that
"items 1 to 4 on the agenda need not be discussed," which brought them
to item 5.

Item 5 was a resolution, read by the Town Clerk, that "the freedom of
the City should be presented to Horace Ventimore, Esq., Citizen and
Candlestick-maker" (which last Horace was not aware of being, but
supposed vaguely that it had been somehow managed while he was at the
buffet in the Library), "in recognition of his services"--the resolution
ran, and Horace listened with all his ears--"especially in connection
with ..." It was most unfortunate--but at this precise point the
official was seized with an attack of coughing, in which all was lost
but the conclusion of the sentence, " ... that have justly entitled him
to the gratitude and admiration of his fellow-countrymen."

Then the six compurgators came forward and vouched for Ventimore's
fitness to receive the freedom. He had painful doubts whether they
altogether understood what a responsibility they were undertaking--but
it was too late to warn them and he could only trust that they knew more
of their business than he did.

After this the City Chamberlain read him an address, to which Horace
listened in resigned bewilderment. The Chamberlain referred to the
unanimity and enthusiasm with which the resolution had been carried, and
said that it was his pleasing and honourable duty, as the mouthpiece of
that ancient City, to address what he described with some inadequacy as
"a few words" to one by adding whose name to their roll of freemen the
Corporation honoured rather themselves than the recipient of their
homage.

It was flattering, but to Horace's ear the phrases sounded excessive,
almost fulsome--though, of course, that depended very much on what he
had done, which he had still to ascertain. The orator proceeded to read
him the "Illustrious List of London's Roll of Fame," a recital which
made Horace shiver with apprehension. For what names they were! What
glorious deeds they had performed! How was it possible that he--plain
Horace Ventimore, a struggling architect who had missed his one great
chance--could have achieved (especially without even being aware of it)
anything that would not seem ludicrously insignificant by comparison?

He had a morbid fancy that the marble goddesses, or whoever they were,
at the base of Nelson's monument opposite, were regarding him with stony
disdain and indignation; that the statue of Wellington knew him for an
arrant impostor, and averted his head with cold contempt; and that the
effigy of Lord Mayor Beckford on the right of the dais would come to
life and denounce him in another moment.

"Turning now to your own distinguished services," he suddenly heard the
City Chamberlain resuming, "you are probably aware, sir, that it is
customary on these occasions to mention specifically the particular
merit which had been deemed worthy of civic recognition."

Horace was greatly relieved to hear it, for it struck him as a most
sensible and, in his own particular case, essential formality.

"But, on the present occasion, sir," proceeded the speaker, "I feel, as
all present must feel, that it would be unnecessary--nay, almost
impertinent--were I to weary the public ear by a halting recapitulation
of deeds with which it is already so appreciatively familiar." At this
he was interrupted by deafening and long-continued applause, at the end
of which he continued: "I have only therefore, to greet you in the name
of the Corporation, and to offer you the right hand of fellowship as a
Freeman, and Citizen, and Candlestick-maker of London."

As he shook hands he presented Horace with a copy of the Oath of
Allegiance, intimating that he was to read it aloud. Naturally,
Ventimore had not the least objection to swear to be good and true to
our Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria, or to be obedient to the Lord Mayor,
and warn him of any conspiracies against the Queen's peace which might
chance to come under his observation; so he took the oath cheerfully
enough, and hoped that this was really the end of the ceremony.

However, to his great chagrin and apprehension, the Lord Mayor rose with
the evident intention of making a speech. He said that the conclusion of
the City to bestow the highest honour in their gift upon Mr. Horace
Ventimore had been--here he hesitated--somewhat hastily arrived at.
Personally, he would have liked a longer time to prepare, to make the
display less inadequate to, and worthier of, this exceptional occasion.
He thought that was the general feeling. (It evidently was, judging from
the loud and unanimous cheering). However, for reasons which--for
reasons with which they were as well acquainted as himself, the notice
had been short. The Corporation had yielded (as they always did, as it
would always be their pride and pleasure to yield) to popular pressure
which was practically irresistible, and had done the best they could in
the limited--he might almost say the unprecedentedly limited--period
allowed them. The proudest leaf in Mr. Ventimore's chaplet of laurels
to-day was, he would venture to assert, the sight of the extraordinary
enthusiasm and assemblage, not only in that noble hall, but in the
thoroughfares of this mighty Metropolis. Under the circumstances, this
was a marvellous tribute to the admiration and affection which Mr.
Ventimore had succeeded in inspiring in the great heart of the people,
rich and poor, high and low. He would not detain his hearers any longer;
all that remained for him to do was to ask Mr. Ventimore's acceptance of
a golden casket containing the roll of freedom, and he felt sure that
their distinguished guest, before proceeding to inscribe his name on the
register, would oblige them all by some account from his own lips of--of
the events in which he had figured so prominently and so creditably.

Horace received the casket mechanically; there was a universal cry of
"Speech!" from the audience, to which he replied by shaking his head in
helpless deprecation--but in vain; he found himself irresistibly pressed
towards the rail in front of the dais, and the roar of applause which
greeted him saved him from all necessity of attempting to speak for
nearly two minutes.

During that interval he had time to clear his brain and think what he
had better do or say in his present unenviable dilemma. For some time
past a suspicion had been growing in his mind, until it had now almost
swollen into certainty. He felt that, before he compromised himself, or
allowed his too generous entertainers to compromise themselves
irretrievably, it was absolutely necessary to ascertain his real
position, and, to do that, he must make some sort of speech. With this
resolve, all his nervousness and embarrassment and indecision melted
away; he faced the assembly coolly and gallantly, convinced that his
best alternative now lay in perfect candour.

"My Lord Mayor, my lords, ladies, and gentlemen," he began, in a clear
voice which penetrated to the farthest gallery and commanded instant
attention. "If you expect to hear from me any description of what I've
done to be received like this, I'm afraid you will be disappointed. For
my own belief is that I've done nothing whatever."

There was a general outcry of "No, no!" at this, and a fervid murmur of
protest.

"It's all very well to say 'No, no,'" said Horace, "and I am extremely
grateful to you all for the interruption. Still, I can only repeat that
I am absolutely unaware of having ever rendered my Country, or this
great City, a single service deserving of the slightest acknowledgment.
I wish I could feel I had--but the truth is that, if I have, the fact
has entirely slipped from my memory."

Again there were murmurs, this time with a certain under-current of
irritation; and he could hear the Lord Mayor behind him remarking to the
City Chamberlain that this was not at all the kind of speech for the
occasion.

"I know what you're thinking," said Horace. "You're thinking this is
mock modesty on my part. But it's nothing of the sort. _I_ don't know
what I've done--but I presume you are all better informed. Because the
Corporation wouldn't have given me that very charming casket--you
wouldn't all of you be here like this--unless you were under a strong
impression that I'd done _something_ to deserve it." At this there was a
fresh outburst of applause. "Just so," said Horace, calmly. "Well, now,
will any of you be kind enough to tell me, in a few words, _what_ you
suppose I've done?"

There was a dead silence, in which every one looked at his or her
neighbour and smiled feebly.

"My Lord Mayor," continued Horace, "I appeal to you to tell me and this
distinguished assembly why on earth we're all here!"

The Lord Mayor rose. "I think it sufficient to say," he announced with
dignity, "that the Corporation and myself were unanimously of opinion
that this distinction should be awarded--for reasons which it is
unnecessary and--hum--ha--invidious to enter into here."

"I am sorry," persisted Horace, "but I must press your lordship for
those reasons. I have an object.... Will the City Chamberlain oblige me,
then?... No? Well, then, the Town Clerk?... No?--it's just as I
suspected: none of you can give me your reasons, and shall I tell you
why? Because there _aren't_ any.... Now, do bear with me for a moment.
I'm quite aware this is very embarrassing for all of you--but remember
that it's infinitely more awkward for _me_! I really cannot accept the
freedom of the City under any suspicion of false pretences. It would be
a poor reward for your hospitality, and base and unpatriotic into the
bargain, to depreciate the value of so great a distinction by permitting
it to be conferred unworthily. If, after you've heard what I am going to
tell you, you still insist on my accepting such an honour, of course I
will not be so ungracious as to refuse it. But I really don't feel that
it would be right to inscribe my name on your Roll of Fame without some
sort of explanation. If I did, I might, for anything I know,
involuntarily be signing the death-warrant of the Corporation!"

There was a breathless hush upon this; the silence grew so intense that
to borrow a slightly involved metaphor from a distinguished friend of
the writer's, you might have picked up a pin in it! Horace leaned
sideways against the rail in an easy attitude, so as to face the Lord
Mayor, as well as a portion of his audience.

"Before I go any farther," he said, "will your lordship pardon me if I
suggest that it might be as well to direct that all reporters present
should immediately withdraw?"

The reporters' table was instantly in a stir of anger, and many of the
guests expressed some dissatisfaction. "We, at least," said the Lord
Mayor, rising, flushed with annoyance, "have no reason to dread
publicity. I decline to make a hole-and-corner affair of this. I shall
give no such orders."

"Very well," said Horace, when the chorus of approval had subsided. "My
suggestion was made quite as much in the Corporation's interests as
mine. I merely thought that, when you all clearly understood how grossly
you've been deluded, you might prefer to have the details kept out of
the newspapers if possible. But if you particularly want them published
over the whole world, why, of course----"

An uproar followed here, under cover of which the Lord Mayor contrived
to give orders to have the doors fastened till further directions.

"Don't make this more difficult and disagreeable for me than it is
already!" said Horace, as soon as he could obtain a hearing again. "You
don't suppose that I should have come here in this Tom-fool's dress,
imposing myself on the hospitality of this great City, if I could have
helped it! If you've been brought here under false pretences, so have I.
If you've been made to look rather foolish, what is _your_ situation to
mine? The fact is, I am the victim of a headstrong force which I am
utterly unable to control...."

Upon this a fresh uproar arose, and prevented him from continuing for
some time. "I only ask for fair play and a patient hearing!" he pleaded.
"Give me that, and I will undertake to restore you all to good humour
before I have done."

They calmed down at this appeal, and he was able to proceed. "My case is
simply this," he said. "A little time ago I happened to go to an auction
and buy a large brass bottle...."

For some inexplicable reason his last words roused the audience to
absolute frenzy; they would not hear anything about the brass bottle.
Every time he attempted to mention it they howled him down, they hissed,
they groaned, they shook their fists; the din was positively deafening.

Nor was the demonstration confined to the male portion of the assembly.
One lady, indeed, who is a prominent leader in society, but whose name
shall not be divulged here, was so carried away by her feelings as to
hurl a heavy cut-glass bottle of smelling-salts at Horace's offending
head. Fortunately for him, it missed him and only caught one of the
officials (Horace was not in a mood to notice details very accurately,
but he had a notion that it was the City Remembrancer) somewhere about
the region of the watch-pocket.

"_Will_ you hear me out?" Ventimore shouted. "I'm not trifling. I
haven't told you yet what was inside the bottle. When I opened it, I
found ..."

He got no farther--for, as the words left his lips, he felt himself
seized by the collar of his robe and lifted off his feet by an agency he
was powerless to resist.

Up and up he was carried, past the great chandeliers, between the carved
and gilded rafters, pursued by a universal shriek of dismay and horror.
Down below he could see the throng of pale, upturned faces, and hear the
wild screams and laughter of several ladies of great distinction in
violent hysterics. And the next moment he was in the glass lantern, and
the latticed panes gave way like tissue paper as he broke through into
the open air, causing the pigeons on the roof to whirr up in a flutter
of alarm.

Of course, he knew that it was the Jinnee who was abducting him in this
sensational manner, and he was rather relieved than alarmed by Fakrash's
summary proceeding, for he seemed, for once, to have hit upon the best
way out of a situation that was rapidly becoming impossible.




