CHAPTER XI. A FOOL'S PARADISE


Ventimore found next morning that his bath and shaving-water had been
brought up, from which he inferred, quite correctly, that his landlady
must have returned.

Secretly he was by no means looking forward to his next interview with
her, but she appeared with his bacon and coffee in a spirit so evidently
chastened that he saw that he would have no difficulty so far as she was
concerned.

"I'm sure, Mr. Ventimore, sir," she began, apologetically, "I don't know
what you must have thought of me and Rapkin last night, leaving the
house like we did!"

"It was extremely inconvenient," said Horace, "and not at all what I
should have expected from you. But possibly you had some reason for it?"

"Why, sir," said Mrs. Rapkin, running her hand nervously along the back
of a chair, "the fact is, something come over me, and come over Rapkin,
as we couldn't stop here another minute not if it was ever so."

"Ah!" said Horace, raising his eyebrows, "restlessness--eh, Mrs. Rapkin?
Awkward that it should come on just then, though, wasn't it?"

"It was the look of the place, somehow," said Mrs. Rapkin. "If you'll
believe me, sir, it was all changed like--nothing in it the same from
top to bottom!"

"Really?" said Horace. "I don't notice any difference myself."

"No more don't I, sir, not by daylight; but last night it was all domes
and harches and marble fountings let into the floor, with parties
moving about downstairs all silent and as black as your hat--which
Rapkin saw them as well as what I did."

"From the state your husband was in last night," said Horace, "I should
say he was capable of seeing anything--and double of most things."

"I won't deny, sir, that Rapkin mayn't have been quite hisself, as a
very little upsets him after he's spent an afternoon studying the papers
and what-not at the libery. But I see the niggers too, Mr. Ventimore,
and no one can say _I_ ever take more than is good for me."

"I don't suggest that for a moment, Mrs. Rapkin," said Horace; "only, if
the house was as you describe last night, how do you account for its
being all right this morning?"

Mrs. Rapkin in her embarrassment was reduced to folding her apron into
small pleats. "It's not for me to say, sir," she replied, "but, if I was
to give my opinion, it would be as them parties as called 'ere on camels
the other day was at the bottom of it."

"I shouldn't wonder if you were right, Mrs. Rapkin," said Horace
blandly; "you see, you had been exerting yourself over the cooking, and
no doubt were in an over-excited state, and, as you say, those camels
had taken hold of your imagination until you were ready to see anything
that Rapkin saw, and _he_ was ready to see anything _you_ did. It's not
at all uncommon. Scientific people, I believe, call it 'Collective
Hallucination.'"

"Law, sir!" said the good woman, considerably impressed by this
diagnosis, "you don't mean to say I had _that_? I was always fanciful
from a girl, and could see things in coffee-grounds as nobody else
could--but I never was took like that before. And to think of me leaving
my dinner half cooked, and you expecting your young lady and her pa and
ma! Well, _there_, now, I _am_ sorry. Whatever did you do, sir?"

"We managed to get food of sorts from somewhere," said Horace, "but it
was most uncomfortable for me, and I trust, Mrs. Rapkin--I sincerely
trust that it will not occur again."

"That I'll answer for it shan't, sir. And you won't take no notice to
Rapkin, sir, will you? Though it was his seein' the niggers and that as
put it into my 'ed; but I 'ave spoke to him pretty severe already, and
he's truly sorry and ashamed for forgetting hisself as he did."

"Very well, Mrs. Rapkin," said Horace; "we will understand that last
night's--hem--rather painful experience is not to be alluded to
again--on either side."

He felt sincerely thankful to have got out of it so easily, for it was
impossible to say what gossip might not have been set on foot if the
Rapkins had not been brought to see the advisability of reticence on the
subject.

"There's one more thing, sir, I wished for to speak to you about," said
Mrs. Rapkin; "that great brass vawse as you bought at an oction some
time back. I dunno if you remember it?"

"I remember it," said Horace. "Well, what about it?"

"Why, sir, I found it in the coal-cellar this morning, and I thought I'd
ask if that was where you wished it kep' in future. For, though no
amount o' polish could make it what I call a tasty thing, it's neither
horniment nor yet useful where it is at present."

"Oh," said Horace, rather relieved, for he had an ill-defined dread from
her opening words that the bottle might have been misbehaving itself in
some way. "Put it wherever you please, Mrs. Rapkin; do whatever you like
with it--so long as I don't see the thing again!"

"Very good, sir; I on'y thought I'd ask the question," said Mrs. Rapkin,
as she closed the door upon herself.

Altogether, Horace walked to Great Cloister Street that morning in a
fairly cheerful mood and amiably disposed, even towards the Jinnee. With
all his many faults, he was a thoroughly good-natured old devil--very
superior in every way to the one the Arabian Nights fisherman found in
_his_ bottle.

"Ninety-nine Jinn out of a hundred," thought Horace, "would have turned
nasty on finding benefit after benefit 'declined with thanks.' But one
good point in Fakrash is that he _does_ take a hint in good part, and,
as soon as he can be made to see where he's wrong, he's always ready to
set things right. And he thoroughly understands now that these Oriental
dodges of his won't do nowadays, and that when people see a penniless
man suddenly wallowing in riches they naturally want to know how he came
by them. I don't suppose he will trouble me much in future. If he should
look in now and then, I must put up with it. Perhaps, if I suggested it,
he wouldn't mind coming in some form that would look less outlandish. If
he would get himself up as a banker, or a bishop--the Bishop of Bagdad,
say--I shouldn't care how often he called. Only, I can't have him coming
down the chimney in either capacity. But he'll see that himself. And
he's done me one real service--I mustn't let myself forget that. He sent
me old Wackerbath. By the way, I wonder if he's seen my designs yet, and
what he thinks of them."

He was at his table, engaged in jotting down some rough ideas for the
decoration of the reception-rooms in the projected house, when Beevor
came in.

"I've got nothing doing just now," he said; "so I thought I'd come in
and have a squint at those plans of yours, if they're forward enough to
be seen yet."

Ventimore had to explain that even the imperfect method of examination
proposed was not possible, as he had despatched the drawings to his
client the night before.

"Phew!" said Beevor; "that's sharp work, isn't it?"

"I don't know. I've been sticking hard at it for over a fortnight."

"Well, you might have given me a chance of seeing what you've made of
it. I let you see all _my_ work!"

"To tell you the honest truth, old fellow, I wasn't at all sure you'd
like it, and I was afraid you'd put me out of conceit with what I'd
done, and Wackerbath was in a frantic hurry to have the plans--so there
it was."

"And do you think he'll be satisfied with them?"

"He ought to be. I don't like to be cock-sure, but I believe--I really
do believe--that I've given him rather more than he expected. It's going
to be a devilish good house, though I say it myself."

"Something new-fangled and fantastic, eh? Well, he mayn't care about it,
you know. When you've had my experience, you'll realise that a client is
a rum bird to satisfy."

"I shall satisfy _my_ old bird," said Horace, gaily. "He'll have a cage
he can hop about in to his heart's content."

"You're a clever chap enough," said Beevor; "but to carry a big job like
this through you want one thing--and that's ballast."

"Not while you heave yours at my head! Come, old fellow, you aren't
really riled because I sent off those plans without showing them to you?
I shall soon have them back, and then you can pitch into 'em as much as
you please. Seriously, though, I shall want all the help you can spare
when I come to the completed designs."

"'Um," said Beevor, "you've got along very well alone so far--at least,
by your own account; so I dare say you'll be able to manage without me
to the end. Only, you know," he added, as he left the room, "you haven't
won your spurs yet. A fellow isn't necessarily a Gilbert Scott, or a
Norman Shaw, or a Waterhouse just because he happens to get a
sixty-thousand pound job the first go off!"

"Poor old Beevor!" thought Horace, repentantly, "I've put his back up.
I might just as well have shown him the plans, after all; it wouldn't
have hurt me and it would have pleased _him_. Never mind, I'll make my
peace with him after lunch. I'll ask him to give me his idea for a--no,
hang it all, even friendship has its limits!"

He returned from lunch to hear what sounded like an altercation of some
sort in his office, in which, as he neared his door, Beevor's voice was
distinctly audible.

"My dear sir," he was saying, "I have already told you that it is no
affair of mine."

"But I ask you, sir, as a brother architect," said another voice,
"whether you consider it professional or reasonable----?"

"As a brother architect," replied Beevor, as Ventimore opened the door,
"I would rather be excused from giving an opinion.... Ah, here is Mr.
Ventimore himself."

Horace entered, to find himself confronted by Mr. Wackerbath, whose face
was purple and whose white whiskers were bristling with rage. "So, sir!"
he began. "So, sir!----" and choked ignominiously.

"There appears to have been some misunderstanding, my dear Ventimore,"
explained Beevor, with a studious correctness which was only a shade
less offensive than open triumph. "I think I'd better leave you and this
gentleman to talk it over quietly."

"Quietly?" exclaimed Mr. Wackerbath, with an apoplectic snort;
"_quietly!!_"

"I've no idea what you are so excited about, sir," said Horace. "Perhaps
you will explain?"

"Explain!" Mr. Wackerbath gasped; "why--no, if I speak just now, I shall
be ill: _you_ tell him," he added, waving a plump hand in Beevor's
direction.

"I'm not in possession of all the facts," said Beevor, smoothly; "but,
so far as I can gather, this gentleman thinks that, considering the
importance of the work he intrusted to your hands, you have given less
time to it than he might have expected. As I have told him, that is a
matter which does not concern me, and which he must discuss with you."

So saying, Beevor retired to his own room, and shut the door with the
same irreproachable discretion, which conveyed that he was not in the
least surprised, but was too much of a gentleman to show it.

"Well, Mr. Wackerbath," began Horace, when they were alone, "so you're
disappointed with the house?"

"Disappointed!" said Mr. Wackerbath, furiously. "I am disgusted, sir,
disgusted!"

Horace's heart sank lower still; had he deceived himself after all,
then? Had he been nothing but a conceited fool, and--most galling
thought of all--had Beevor judged him only too accurately? And yet, no,
he could not believe it--he _knew_ his work was good!

"This is plain speaking with a vengeance," he said; "I'm sorry you're
dissatisfied. I did my best to carry out your instructions."

"Oh, you did?" sputtered Mr. Wackerbath. "That's what you call--but go
on, sir, _go_ on!"

"I got it done as quickly as possible," continued Horace, "because I
understood you wished no time to be lost."

"No one can accuse you of dawdling over it. What I should like to know
is how the devil you managed to get it done in the time?"

"I worked incessantly all day and every day," said Horace. "That's how I
managed it--and this is all the thanks I get for it!"

"Thanks?" Mr. Wackerbath well-nigh howled. "You--you insolent young
charlatan; you expect thanks!"

"Now look here, Mr. Wackerbath," said Horace, whose own temper was
getting a little frayed. "I'm not accustomed to being treated like this,
and I don't intend to submit to it. Just tell me--in as moderate
language as you can command--what you object to?"

"I object to the whole damned thing, sir! I mean, I repudiate the entire
concern. It's the work of a raving lunatic--a place that no English
gentleman, sir, with any self-respect or--ah!--consideration for his
reputation and position in the county, could consent to occupy for a
single hour!"

"Oh," said Horace, feeling deathly sick, "in that case it is useless, of
course, to suggest any modifications."

"Absolutely!" said Mr. Wackerbath.

"Very well, then; there's no more to be said," replied Horace. "You will
have no difficulty in finding an architect who will be more successful
in realising your intentions. Mr. Beevor, the gentleman you met just
now," he added, with a touch of bitterness, "would probably be just your
man. Of course I retire altogether. And really, if any one is the
sufferer over this, I fancy it's myself. I can't see how you are any the
worse."

"Not any the worse?" cried Mr. Wackerbath, "when the infernal place is
built!"

"Built!" echoed Horace feebly.

"I tell you, sir, I saw it with my own eyes driving to the station this
morning; my coachman and footman saw it; my wife saw it--damn it, sir,
we _all_ saw it!"

Then Horace understood. His indefatigable Jinnee had been at work again!
Of course, for Fakrash it must have been what he would term "the easiest
of affairs"--especially after a glance at the plans (and Ventimore
remembered that the Jinnee had surprised him at work upon them, and even
requested to have them explained to him)--to dispense with contractors
and bricklayers and carpenters, and construct the entire building in the
course of a single night.

It was a generous and spirited action--but, particularly now that the
original designs had been found faulty and rejected, it placed the
unfortunate architect in a most invidious position.

"Well, sir," said Mr. Wackerbath, with elaborate irony, "I presume it
is you whom I have to thank for improving my land by erecting this
precious palace on it?"

"I--I----" began Horace, utterly broken down; and then he saw, with
emotions that may be imagined, the Jinnee himself, in his green robes,
standing immediately behind Mr. Wackerbath.

"Greeting to you," said Fakrash, coming forward with his smile of
amiable cunning. "If I mistake not," he added, addressing the startled
estate agent, who had jumped visibly, "thou art the merchant for whom my
son here," and he laid a hand on Horace's shrinking shoulder, "undertook
to construct a mansion?"

"I am," said Mr. Wackerbath, in some mystification. "Have I the pleasure
of addressing Mr. Ventimore, senior?"

"No, no," put in Horace; "no relation. He's a sort of informal partner."

"Hast thou not found him an architect of divine gifts?" inquired the
Jinnee, beaming with pride. "Is not the palace that he hath raised for
thee by his transcendent accomplishments a marvel of beauty and
stateliness, and one that Sultans might envy?"

"No, sir!" shouted the infuriated Mr. Wackerbath; "since you ask my
opinion, it's nothing of the sort! It's a ridiculous tom-fool cross
between the palm-house at Kew and the Brighton Pavilion! There's no
billiard-room, and not a decent bedroom in the house. I've been all over
it, so I ought to know; and as for drainage, there isn't a sign of it.
And he has the brass--ah, I should say, the unblushing effrontery--to
call that a country house!"

Horace's dismay was curiously shot with relief. The Jinnee, who was
certainly very far from being a genius except by courtesy, had taken it
upon himself to erect the palace according to his own notions of Arabian
domestic luxury--and Horace, taught by bitter experience, could
sympathise to some extent with his unfortunate client. On the other
hand, it was balm to his smarting self-respect to find that it was not
his own plans, after all, which had been found so preposterous; and, by
some obscure mental process, which I do not propose to explain, he
became reconciled, and almost grateful, to the officious Fakrash. And
then, too, he was _his_ Jinnee, and Horace had no intention of letting
him be bullied by an outsider.

"Let me explain, Mr. Wackerbath," he said. "Personally I've had nothing
to do with this. This gentleman, wishing to spare me the trouble, has
taken upon himself to build your house for you, without consulting
either of us, and, from what I know of his powers in the direction, I've
no doubt that--that it's a devilish fine place, in its way. Anyhow, we
make no charge for it--he presents it to you as a free gift. Why not
accept it as such and make the best of it?"

"Make the best of it?" stormed Mr. Wackerbath. "Stand by and see the
best site in three counties defaced by a jimcrack Moorish nightmare like
that! Why, they'll call it 'Wackerbath's Folly,' sir. I shall be the
laughing-stock of the neighbourhood. I can't live in the beastly
building. I couldn't afford to keep it up, and I won't have it cumbering
my land. Do you hear? _I won't!_ I'll go to law, cost me what it may,
and compel you and your Arabian friends there to pull the thing down.
I'll take the case up to the House of Lords, if necessary, and fight you
as long as I can stand!"

"As long as thou canst stand!" repeated Fakrash, gently. "That is a long
time truly, O thou litigious one!... On all fours, ungrateful dog that
thou art!" he cried, with an abrupt and entire change of manner, "and
crawl henceforth for the remainder of thy days. I, Fakrash-el-Aamash,
command thee!"

It was both painful and grotesque to see the portly and intensely
respectable Mr. Wackerbath suddenly drop forward on his hands while
desperately striving to preserve his dignity. "How dare you, sir?" he
almost barked, "how _dare_ you, I say? Are you aware that I could summon
you for this? Let me up. I _insist_ upon getting up!"

"O contemptible in aspect!" replied the Jinnee, throwing open the door.
"Begone to thy kennel."

"I won't! I can't!" whimpered the unhappy man. "How do you expect
me--me!--to cross Westminster Bridge on all fours? What will the
officials think at Waterloo, where I have been known and respected for
years? How am I to face my family in--in this position? Do, for mercy's
sake, let me get up!"

Horace had been too shocked and startled to speak before, but now
humanity, coupled with disgust for the Jinnee's high-handed methods,
compelled him to interfere. "Mr. Fakrash," he said, "this has gone far
enough. Unless you stop tormenting this unfortunate gentleman, I've done
with you."

"Never," said Fakrash. "He hath dared to abuse my palace, which is far
too sumptuous a dwelling for such a son of a burnt dog as he. Therefore,
I will make his abode to be in the dust for ever."

"But I _don't_ find fault," yelped poor Mr. Wackerbath. "You--you
entirely misunderstood the--the few comments I ventured to make. It's a
capital mansion, handsome, and yet 'homey,' too. I'll never say another
word against it. I'll--yes, I'll _live_ in it--if only you'll let me
up?"

"Do as he asks you," said Horace to the Jinnee, "or I swear I'll never
speak to you again."

"Thou art the arbiter of this matter," was the reply. "And if I yield,
it is at thy intercession, and not his. Rise then," he said to the
humiliated client; "depart, and show us the breadth of thy shoulders."

It was this precise moment which Beevor, who was probably unable to
restrain his curiosity any longer, chose to re-enter the room. "Oh,
Ventimore," he began, "did I leave my----?... I beg your pardon. I
thought you were alone again."

"Don't go, sir," said Mr. Wackerbath, as he scrambled awkwardly to his
feet, his usually florid face mottled in grey and lilac. "I--I should
like you to know that, after talking things quietly over with your
friend Mr. Ventimore and his partner here, I am thoroughly convinced
that my objections were quite untenable. I retract all I said.
The house is--ah--admirably planned: _most_ convenient, roomy,
and--ah--unconventional. The--the entire freedom from all sanitary
appliances is a particular recommendation. In short, I am more than
satisfied. Pray forget anything I may have said which might be taken to
imply the contrary.... Gentlemen, good afternoon!"

He bowed himself past the Jinnee in a state of deference and
apprehension, and was heard stumbling down the staircase. Horace hardly
dared to meet Beevor's eyes, which were fixed upon the green-turbaned
Jinnee, as he stood apart in dreamy abstraction, smiling placidly to
himself.

"I say," Beevor said to Horace, at last, in an undertone, "you never
told me you had gone into partnership."

"He's not a regular partner," whispered Ventimore; "he does odd things
for me occasionally, that's all."

"He soon managed to smooth your client down," remarked Beevor.

"Yes," said Horace; "he's an Oriental, you see, and, he has a--a very
persuasive manner. Would you like to be introduced?"

"If it's all the same to you," replied Beevor, still below his voice,
"I'd rather be excused. To tell you the truth, old fellow, I don't
altogether fancy the looks of him, and it's my opinion," he added, "that
the less you have to do with him the better. He strikes me as a
wrong'un, old man."

"No, no," said Horace; "eccentric, that's all--you don't understand
him."

"Receive news!" began the Jinnee, after Beevor, with suspicion and
disapproval evident even on his back and shoulders, had retreated to
his own room, "Suleyman, the son of Daood, sleeps with his fathers."

"I know," retorted Horace, whose nerves were unequal to much reference
to Solomon just then. "So does Queen Anne."

"I have not heard of her. But art thou not astounded, then, by my
tidings?"

"I have matters nearer home to think about," said Horace, dryly. "I must
say, Mr. Fakrash, you have landed me in a pretty mess!"

"Explain thyself more fully, for I comprehend thee not."

"Why on earth," Horace groaned, "couldn't you let me build that house my
own way?"

"Did I not hear thee with my own ears lament thy inability to perform
the task? Thereupon, I determined that no disgrace should fall upon thee
by reason of such incompetence, since I myself would erect a palace so
splendid that it should cause thy name to live for ever. And, behold, it
is done."

"It is," said Horace. "And so am I. I don't want to reproach you. I
quite feel that you have acted with the best intentions; but, oh, hang
it all! _can't_ you see that you've absolutely wrecked my career as an
architect?"

"That is a thing that cannot be," returned the Jinnee, "seeing that thou
hast all the credit."

"The credit! This is England, not Arabia. What credit can I gain from
being supposed to be the architect of an Oriental pavilion, which might
be all very well for Haroun-al-Raschid, but I can assure you is
preposterous as a home for an average Briton?"

"Yet that overfed hound," remarked the Jinnee, "expressed much
gratification therewith."

"Naturally, after he had found that he could not give a candid opinion
except on all-fours. A valuable testimonial, that! And how do you
suppose I can take his money? No, Mr. Fakrash, if I have to go on
all-fours myself for it, I must say, and I will say, that you've made a
most frightful muddle of it!"

"Acquaint me with thy wishes," said Fakrash, a little abashed, "for thou
knowest that I can refuse thee naught."

"Then," said Horace, boldly, "couldn't you remove that palace--dissipate
it into space or something?"

"Verily," said the Jinnee, in an aggravated tone, "to do good acts unto
such as thee is but wasted time, for thou givest me no peace till they
are undone!"

"This is the last time," urged Horace; "I promise never to ask you for
anything again."

"Not for the first time hast thou made such a promise," said Fakrash.
"And save for the magnitude of thy service unto me, I would not hearken
to this caprice of thine, nor wilt thou find me so indulgent on another
occasion. But for this once"--and he muttered some words and made a
sweeping gesture with his right hand--"thy desire is granted unto thee.
Of the palace and all that is therein there remaineth no trace!"

"Another surprise for poor old Wackerbath," thought Horace, "but a
pleasant one this time. My dear Mr. Fakrash," he said aloud, "I really
can't say how grateful I am to you. And now--I hate bothering you like
this, but if you _could_ manage to look in on Professor Futvoye----"

"What!" cried the Jinnee, "yet another request? Already!"

"Well, you promised you'd do that before, you know!" said Horace.

"For that matter," remarked Fakrash, "I have already fulfilled my
promise."

"You have?" Horace exclaimed. "And does he believe now that it's all
true about that bottle?"

"When I left him," answered the Jinnee, "all his doubts were removed."

"By Jove, you _are_ a trump!" cried Horace, only too glad to be able to
commend with sincerity. "And do you think, if I went to him now, I
should find him the same as usual?"

"Nay," said Fakrash, with his weak and yet inscrutable smile, "that is
more than I can promise thee."

"But why?" asked Horace, "if he knows all?"

There was the oddest expression in the Jinnee's furtive eyes: a kind of
elfin mischief combined with a sense of wrong-doing, like a naughty
child whose palate is still reminiscent of illicit jam. "Because," he
replied, with a sound between a giggle and a chuckle, "because, in order
to overcome his unbelief, it was necessary to transform him into a
one-eyed mule of hideous appearance."

"_What!_" cried Horace. But, whether to avoid thanks or explanations,
the Jinnee had disappeared with his customary abruptness.

"Fakrash!" shouted Horace, "Mr. Fakrash! Come back! Do you hear? I
_must_ speak to you!" There was no answer; the Jinnee might be well on
his way to Lake Chad, or Jericho, by that time--he was certainly far
enough from Great Cloister Street.

Horace sat down at his drawing-table, and, his head buried in his hands,
tried to think out this latest complication. Fakrash had transformed
Professor Futvoye into a one-eyed mule. It would have seemed incredible,
almost unthinkable, once, but so many impossibilities had happened to
Horace of late that one more made little or no strain upon his
credulity.

What he felt chiefly was the new barrier that this event must raise
between himself and Sylvia; to do him justice, the mere fact that the
father of his _fiancée_ was a mule did not lessen his ardour in the
slightest. Even if he had felt no personal responsibility for the
calamity, he loved Sylvia far too well to be deterred by it, and few
family cupboards are without a skeleton of some sort.

With courage and the determination to look only on the bright side of
things, almost any domestic drawback can be lived down.

But the real point, as he instantly recognised, was whether in the
changed condition of circumstances Sylvia would consent to marry _him_.
Might she not, after the experiences of that abominable dinner of his
the night before, connect him in some way with her poor father's
transformation? She might even suspect him of employing this means of
compelling the Professor to renew their engagement; and, indeed, Horace
was by no means certain himself that the Jinnee might not have acted
from some muddle-headed motive of this kind. It was likely enough that
the Professor, after learning the truth, should have refused to allow
his daughter to marry the _protégé_ of so dubious a patron, and that
Fakrash had then resorted to pressure.

In any case, Ventimore knew Sylvia well enough to feel sure that pride
would steel her heart against him so long as this obstacle remained.

It would be unseemly to set down here all that Horace said and thought
of the person who had brought all this upon them, but after some wild
and futile raving he became calm enough to recognise that his proper
place was by Sylvia's side. Perhaps he ought to have told her at first,
and then she would have been less unprepared for this--and yet how could
he trouble her mind so long as he could cling to the hope that the
Jinnee would cease to interfere?

But now he could be silent no longer; naturally the prospect of calling
at Cottesmore Gardens just then was anything but agreeable, but he felt
it would be cowardly to keep away.

Besides, he could cheer them up; he could bring with him a message of
hope. No doubt they believed that the Professor's transformation would
be permanent--a harrowing prospect for so united a family; but,
fortunately, Horace would be able to reassure them on this point.

Fakrash had always revoked his previous performances as soon as he could
be brought to understand their fatuity--and Ventimore would take good
care that he revoked this.

Nevertheless, it was with a sinking heart and an unsteady hand that he
pulled the visitors' bell at the Futvoyes' house that afternoon, for he
neither knew in what state he should find that afflicted family, nor how
they would regard his intrusion at such a time.




