CHAPTER XXXIX.


Not one of the party slept much on this night. There was much to do, and
much to be looked after. Captain Sinclair, as it may be supposed, was
fully occupied with Mary Percival, of whom more anon. As soon as they
had taken up their position in the clearing, and made arrangements for
the accommodation of Mary, they relieved the Strawberry from her charge
of the prisoners, whom they brought to the clearing, and made to sit
down close to them. Percival, who had not yet been freed from his bonds,
was now untied, and suffered to walk about, one of the men keeping close
to him, and watching him carefully. The first object which caught his
eye, was the body of the Angry Snake. Percival looked on it for some
time, and then sat down by the side of it. There he remained for more
than two hours, without speaking, when a hole having been dug out by one
of the party, the body was put in and covered up. Percival remained a
few minutes by the side of the grave, and then turned to the two
wounded Indians. He brought them water, and spoke to them in the Indian
tongue; but while he was still with them, Mary sent for him to speak
with him, for as yet she had scarcely seen him. The sight of Mary
appeared to have a powerful effect upon the boy; he listened to her as
she soothed and caressed him, and appearing to be overcome with a
variety of sensations, he lay down, moaned, and at last fell fast
asleep.

The soldier who had been shot by the Angry Snake was buried before they
buried the chief. Martin's wound had been dressed by his wife, the
Strawberry, who was very skillful in Indian surgery. She had previously
applied cataplasms made from the bruised leaves which she and the Indian
woman had sought for, to the feet of Mary Percival, which were in a
state of great inflammation, and Mary had found herself already much
relieved by the application. Before the day dawned, the two Indians who
had been wounded, were dead, and were immediately buried by the side of
the chief.

Alfred and Malachi had resolved to set off the next morning, on their
return home, if they found it possible to convey Mary Percival; but
their party was now reduced, as one of the soldiers had been killed, and
Martin was incapable of service. The Indian woman would also be fully
loaded with the extra rifles, the two which they had captured from the
Indians, the one belonging to the soldier, and Martin's, who could not
carry any thing in his present state.

They were now only six effective men, as John could not be of much use
in carrying, and, moreover, was appointed to watch Percival. Then they
had the two prisoners to take charge of, so that they were somewhat
embarrassed. Malachi, however, proposed that they should make a litter
of boughs, welded together very tight, and suspended on a pole so as to
be carried between two men. Mary Percival was not a very great weight,
and, by relieving each other continually, they would be able to get some
miles every day, till Mary was well enough to walk with them. Alfred
assented to this, and, as soon as it was daylight, went into the woods
with Malachi, to assist him in cutting the boughs. On their return, they
found that all the rest of the party were up, and that Mary felt little
or no pain. They made their breakfast on their salt provisions, which
were now nearly expended, and as soon as their meal was over, they put
Mary upon the litter and set off, taking the Indian prisoners with them,
as they thought it not yet advisable to give them their liberty. The
first day they made but a few miles, as they were obliged to stop, that
they might procure some food. The party were left under a large tree,
which was a good land-mark, under the charge of Captain Sinclair, while
Malachi and Alfred went in search of game. At nightfall they returned
with a deer which they had killed, when the Strawberry informed them
that the Indian woman had told her, that about two miles to the
southward there was a river which ran into the lake, and that there were
two canoes belonging to the band, hauled up in the bushes on the beach;
that the river was broad and swift, and would soon take them to the
lake, by the shores of which they could paddle the canoe to the
settlement. This appeared worthy of consideration, as it would in the
end, perhaps, save time, and at all events allow Mary Percival to
recover. They decided that they would go to the river, and take the
canoes, as the Indian woman said that they were large enough to hold
them all.

The next morning, guided by the Indian woman, they set off in the
direction of the river, and arrived at it in the afternoon. They found
the canoes, which were large, and in good order, and having carried them
down to the beach, they resolved to put off their embarkation till the
following day, as they were again in want of provisions for their
subsistence. Alfred, Malachi and John went out this time, for Percival
had shown himself so quiet and contented, and had gradually become so
fond of being near Mary Percival, that he appeared to have awakened from
his Indian dream, and renewed all his former associations. They did not,
therefore, think it necessary to watch him any more--indeed, he never
would leave Mary's side, and began now to ask many questions, which
proved that he had recalled to mind much of what had been forgotten
during his long sojourn with the Indians. The hunters returned, having
been very successful, and loaded with meat enough to last for four or
five days. At daylight the next morning, they led the prisoners about
half a mile into the woods, and, pointing to the north as to the
direction they were to go, cast loose the deer-thongs which confined
them, and set them at liberty. Having done this, they embarked in the
canoes, and were soon gliding rapidly down the stream.

The river upon which they embarked, at that time little known to the
Europeans, is now called the river Thames, and the town built upon it is
named London. It falls into the upper part of Lake Ontario, and is a
fine rapid stream. For three days they paddled their canoes,
disembarking at night to sleep and cook their provisions, and on the
fourth they were compelled to stop, that they might procure more food.
They were successful, and on the next day they entered the lake, about
two hundred miles to the west of the settlement. Mary Percival was now
quite recovered, and found her journey or voyage delightful; the country
was in full beauty; the trees waved their boughs down to the river side,
and they did not fall in with any Indians, or perceive any lodges on the
bank. Sometimes they started the deer which had come down to drink in
the stream, and on one occasion, as they rounded a point, they fell in
with a herd which were in the water swimming across, and in this
position they destroyed as many as they required for their food till
they hoped to arrive at the settlement.

Percival was now quite reconciled to his removal from an Indian life,
and appeared most anxious to rejoin his father and mother, of whom he
talked incessantly; for he had again recovered his English, which,
strange to say, although he perfectly understood it when spoken to, he
had almost forgotten to pronounce, and at first spoke with difficulty.
The weather was remarkably fine, and the waters of the lake were so
smooth, that they made rapid progress, although they invariably
disembarked at night. The only annoyance they had was from the
musquitoes, which rose in clouds as soon as they landed, and were not
to be dispersed until they had lighted a very large fire, accompanied
with thick smoke; but this was a trifle compared with their joy at the
happy deliverance of the prisoners, and success of their expedition.
Most grateful, indeed, were they to God for his mercies, and none more
so than Mary Percival and Captain Sinclair, who never left her side till
it was time to retire to rest.

On the sixth day, in the forenoon, they were delighted to perceive Fort
Frontignac in the distance, and although the house at the settlement was
hid from their sight by the point covered with wood which intervened,
they knew that they were not above four or five miles distant. In less
than another hour, they were abreast of the prairie, and landed at the
spot where their own punt was moored. Mr. and Mrs. Campbell had not
perceived the canoes, for, although anxiously looking out every day for
the return of the party, their eyes and attention were directed on land,
not having any idea of their return by water.

"My dear Alfred," said Mary, "I do not think it will be prudent to let
my aunt see Percival at once; we must prepare her a little for his
appearance. She has so long considered him as dead, that the shock may
be too great."

"You say true, my dear Mary. Then we will go forward with Captain
Sinclair and Malachi, and John. Let Percival be put in the middle of the
remainder of the party, who must follow afterward, and then be taken up
to Malachi's lodge. He can remain there with the Strawberry until we
come and fetch him."

Having made these arrangements, to which Percival was with difficulty
made to agree, they walked up as proposed, to the house. Outside of the
palisade, they perceived Mr. and Mrs. Campbell, with their backs toward
them, looking toward the forest, in the direction which the party had
taken when they left. But when they were half-way from the beach, Henry
came out with Oscar from the cottage, and the dog, immediately
perceiving them, bounded to them, barking with delight. Henry cried out,
"Father--mother, here they are,--here they come." Mr. and Mrs. Campbell
of course turned round, and beheld the party advancing; they flew to
meet them, and as they caught Mary in their arms, all explanation for a
time was unnecessary--she was recovered, and that was sufficient for the
time.

"Come, mother, let us go into the house, that you may compose yourself a
little," said Alfred,--that she might not perceive Percival among the
party that followed at a distance. "Let me support you. Take my arm."

Mrs. Campbell, who trembled very much, did so, and thus turned away from
the group among whom Percival was walking. Emma was looking at them
attentively, and was about to exclaim, when Captain Sinclair put his
finger to his lips.

As soon as they arrived at the house, and had gone in, Alfred, in a few
words, gave them an account of what had passed--how successful they had
been in their attempt, and how little they had to fear from the Indians
in future.

"How grateful I am!" exclaimed Mrs. Campbell. "God be praised for all
his mercies! I was fearful that I should have lost you, my dear Mary, as
well as my poor boy. He is lost forever--but God's will be done."

"It is very strange, mother," said Alfred, "but we heard, on our
journey, that the Indians had found a white boy in the woods."

"Alas! not mine."

"I have reason to believe that it was Percival, my dear mother, and have
hopes that he is yet alive."

"My dear Alfred, do not say so unless you have good cause; you little
know the yearnings of a mother's heart; the very suggestion of such a
hope has thrown me into a state of agitation and nervousness of which
you can form no conception. I have been reconciled to the Divine will;
let me not return to a state of anxiety and repining."

"Do you think, my dear mother, that I would raise such hopes if I had
not good reason to suppose that they would be realized? No, my dear
mother, I am not so cruel."

"Then you know that Percival is alive?" said Mrs. Campbell, seizing
Alfred by the arm.

"Calm yourself, my dear mother, I do know--I am certain that he is
alive, and that it was he who was found by the Indians; and I have great
hopes that we may recover him."

"God grant it! God grant it in his great mercy!" said Mrs. Campbell, "my
heart is almost breaking with joy: may God sustain me! Oh, where is
he--my dear Alfred--where is he?" continued Mrs. Campbell, Alfred made
no reply, but a flood of tears came to her relief.

"I will explain it to you when you are more composed, my dear mother.
Emma, you have not said one word to me."

"I have been too much overjoyed to speak, Alfred," replied Emma,
extending her hand to him, "but no one welcomes your return more
sincerely than I do, and no one is more grateful to you for having
brought Mary back."

"Now, Alfred, I am calm," said Mrs. Campbell, "so let me hear at once
all you know."

"I see you are calm, my dear mother, and I therefore now tell you that
Percival is not far off."

"Alfred! he is here; I am sure he is."

"He is with Malachi and the Strawberry; in a minute I will bring him."

Alfred left the house: the intelligence was almost too overpowering for
Mrs. Campbell. Mary and Emma hastened to her, and supported her. In
another minute Alfred returned with Percival, and the mother embraced
and wept over her long lost child,--and then gave him to his father's
arms.

"How this has happened, and by what merciful interference he has been
preserved and restored to us," said Mr. Campbell, when their first
emotions were over, "we have yet to learn; but one thing we do know, and
are sure of, that it is by the goodness of God alone. Let us return our
thanks while our hearts are yet warm with gratitude and love, and may
our thanksgiving be graciously received."

Mr. Campbell kneeled down, and his example was followed by all the rest
of the party assembled. In a fervent tone he returned thanks for the
recent mercies vouchsafed to his family, which, he expressed a hope,
would never be forgotten, but would prove a powerful inducement to them
all, to lead a more devout life of faith in Him who had so graciously
supported them in the hour of peril and affliction,--who had so
wonderfully restored to them their lost treasures, and turned all their
gloom into sunshine,--filling their hearts with joy and gladness.

"And now, my dear Alfred," said Mrs. Campbell, whose arms still
encircled the neck of Percival, "do pray tell us what has taken place,
and how you recovered Mary and this dear boy."

Alfred then entered into his detail, first stating the knowledge which
Captain Sinclair, Malachi, and himself had of Percival being still in
existence from the letter written by the Indian woman,--the seizure and
confinement of the Young Otter in consequence, which was retaliated by
the abduction of Mary. When he had finished, Mr. Campbell said--

"And poor Martin, where is he, that I may thank him?"

"He is at his own lodge, with the Strawberry, who is dressing his wound;
for we have not been able to do so for two or three days, and it has
become very painful."

"We owe him a large debt of gratitude," said Mr. Campbell; "he has
suffered much on our account. And your poor man, Captain Sinclair, who
fell!"

"Yes," replied Sinclair, "he was one of our best men--but it was the
will of Heaven. He lost his life in the recovery of my dear Mary, and I
shall not forget his wife and child, you may depend upon it."

"Now, Mary, let us have your narrative of what passed when you were in
company of the Indians, before your rescue."

"I was, as you know, gathering the cranberries in the Cedar Swamp, when
I was suddenly seized, and something was thrust against my mouth, so
that I had no time or power to cry out. My head was then wrapped up in
some folds of blanket, by which I was almost suffocated, and I was then
lifted up and borne away by two or three men. For a time I kept my
senses, but at last the suffocation was so great, that my head swam, and
I believe I fainted, for I do not recollect being put down; yet after a
time I found myself lying under a tree, and surrounded by five or six
Indians, who were squatted round me. I was not a little terrified, as
you may imagine. They neither moved nor spoke for some time; I
endeavored to rise, but a hand on my shoulder kept me down, and I did
not attempt a useless resistance. Soon afterward, an Indian woman
brought me some water, and I immediately recognized her as the one whom
we had succored when we found her in the woods. This gave me courage and
hope, though her countenance was immovable, and I could not perceive,
even by her eyes, that she attempted any recognition; but reflection
convinced me that, if she intended to help me, she was right in so
doing. After I had raised myself, and drunk some water, the Indians had
a talk in a low voice, I observed that they paid deference to one, and
from the description which my father and Alfred had given of the Angry
Snake, I felt sure that it was he. We remained about half an hour on
this spot, when they rose, and made signs to me that I was to come with
them. Of course I could do no otherwise, and we walked till night came
on, when I was, as you may imagine, not a little tired. They then left
me with the Indian woman, retiring a few yards from me. The woman made
signs that I was to sleep, and although I thought that was impossible, I
was so much fatigued that, after putting up my prayers to the Almighty,
I had not lain down many minutes before I was fast asleep.

"Before daylight, I was awakened by their voices, and the woman brought
me a handful of parched Indian corn; not quite so good a breakfast as I
had been accustomed to; but I was hungry, and I contrived to eat it. As
soon as the day broke we set off again, and toward evening arrived at a
lake. A canoe was brought out from some bushes; we all got into it, and
paddled up along the banks for two or three hours, when we disembarked
and renewed our journey. My feet were now becoming very sore and
painful, for they were blistered all over, and I could scarcely get
along; they compelled me, however, to proceed, not using any great
force, but still dragging me and pushing me, to make me keep up with
them. I soon perceived that I was a prisoner only, and not likely to be
ill treated if I complied with their wishes. Toward evening I could
hardly put one foot before the other, for they had obliged me to walk in
the water of a stream for two or three miles, and my shoes were quite
worn out in consequence. At night they again stopped, and the Indian
woman prepared some herbs, and applied them to my feet. This gave me
great relief, but still she continued to take no notice of any signs I
made to her. The next morning I found I had received so much benefit
from the application of the herbs, that for the first half of the day I
walked on pretty well, and was a little in advance, when, hearing the
chief speak in an angry tone behind me, I turned round, and, to my
horror, saw him raise his tomahawk, and strike down the poor Indian
woman. I could not refrain from hastening to her; but I had just time to
perceive that her skull was cloven, and that she was, as I imagined,
dead, when I was dragged away and forced to continue my journey. You may
imagine how my blood curdled at this scene, and how great were now my
apprehensions for myself. Why I had been carried away I knew not, for I
was as ignorant as you were of Percival being alive, and of the Young
Otter having been detained at the fort. My idea was, when the chief
struck down the Indian woman, that it was to get rid of her, and that I
was to replace her. This idea was almost madness, but still I had hope,
and I prayed as I walked along to that God who sees the most secret act,
and hears the most silent prayer of the heart, and I felt an assurance
while praying that I should be rescued. I knew that my absence would be
immediately discovered, and that there were those who would risk their
lives to rescue me, if I was still in existence; and I therefore used
all my efforts to walk on as fast as I could, and not irritate the
Indians. But that night I had no one to dress my feet, which were
bleeding and very much swelled, and I was very wretched when I lay down
alone. I could not drive from my thoughts the poor Indian woman
weltering in her blood, and murdered for no crime or fault--nothing that
I could discover. The next morning, as usual, my food was some parched
Indian corn, and of that I received only a handful for my sustenance
during the twenty-four hours; however, hunger I never felt, I had too
much pain. I was able to drag myself on till about noon, when I felt
that I could not proceed further. I stopped and sat down; the chief
ordered me to get up again by signs; I pointed to my feet, which were
now swelled above the ankles, but he insisted, and raised his tomahawk
to frighten me into compliance. I was so worn out, that I could have
almost received the blow with thankfulness, but I remembered you, my
dear uncle and aunt and others, and resolved for your sakes to make one
more effort. I did so; I ran and walked for an hour more in perfect
agony; at last nature could support the pain no longer, and I fell
insensible."

"My poor Mary!" exclaimed Emma.

"I thought of you often and often, my dear sister," replied Mary,
kissing her.

"I believe it was a long while before I came to my senses," continued
Mary, "for when I did, I found that the Indians were very busy weaving
branches into a sort of litter. As soon as they had finished, they put
me upon it, and I was carried by two of them swinging on a pole which
they put on their shoulders. I need hardly say, that the journey was now
more agreeable than it was before, although my feet were in a dreadful
state, and gave me much pain. That night we stopped by a rivulet, and I
kept my feet in the water for two or three hours, which brought down the
inflammation and swelling very much, and I contrived after that to gain
some sleep. They carried me one more day, when they considered that they
had done enough, and I was again ordered to walk; I did so for two days,
and was then in the same condition as before. A litter was therefore
again constructed, and I was carried till I arrived at the lodges of the
Angry Snake and his band. What passed from that time you have heard from
Alfred."

When Mary Percival had finished her narrative, they all sat down to
supper, and it hardly need be said that Mr. Campbell did not fail,
before they retired to rest, again to pour forth his thanksgivings to
the Almighty for the preservation of those who were so dear. The next
morning, they all rose in health and spirits. Martin came early to the
house with the Strawberry; his wound was much better, and he received
the thanks and condolence of Mr. and Mrs. Campbell.

When they were at breakfast, Mr. Campbell said, "John, in our joy at
seeing your brother and cousin again, I quite forgot to scold you for
running away as you did."

"Then don't do it now, sir," said Malachi, "for he was very useful, I
can assure you."

"No, I won't scold him now," replied Mr. Campbell; "but he must not act
so another time. If he had confided to me his anxious wish to join you,
I should probably have given my permission."

"I must now take my leave, and return to the fort," said Captain
Sinclair; "I do, however, trust I shall see you all again in a few days,
but I must report the results of the expedition, and the death of poor
Watkins. May I borrow one of your horses, Mr. Campbell?"

"Certainly," replied Mr. Campbell; "you know the _bateau_ is expected
every day from Montreal; perhaps you will bring us our letters when it
arrives."

Captain Sinclair took his leave, as it may be imagined, very
reluctantly, and in a day or two the family again settled down to their
usual occupations. The emigrants had, during the absence of the
expedition, gathered in a great portion of the corn, and now all hands
were employed in finishing the harvest.

"How happy we are now, Mary," said Emma to her sister, as they were
walking by the stream watching John, who was catching trout.

"Yes, my dear Emma, we have had a lesson which will, I trust, prevent
any future repining, if we have felt any, at our present position. The
misery we have been rescued from has shown us how much we have to be
thankful for. We have nothing more to fear from the Indians, and I feel
as if I could now pass the remainder of my life here in peace and
thankfulness."

"Not without Captain Sinclair?"

"Not always without him; the time will, I trust, come when I may reward
him for his patience and his regard for me; but it has not yet come; and
it's for my uncle and aunt to decide when it shall. Where's Percival?"

"He is gone into the woods with Malachi, and with a rifle on his
shoulder, of which he is not a little proud. John is not at all jealous.
He says that Percival ought to know how to fire a rifle, and throw away
that foolish bow and arrow. Do you not think that his residence among
the Indians has made a great change in Percival?"

"A very great one; he is more manly and more taciturn; he appears to
think more and talk less. But Henry is beckoning to us. Dinner is ready,
and we must not keep hungry people waiting."

"No," replied Emma; "for in that case I should keep myself waiting."




