CHAPTER 15. The Pirates' Hold.


Sivagi, the founder of the Mahratta Empire, had, in 1662, seized and
fortified Yijiyadrug; or, as the English call it, Gheriah, a town at
the mouth of the river Kanui, one hundred and seventy miles south of
Bombay; and also the island of Suwarndrug, about half way between
Gheriah and Bombay. Here he established a piratical fleet. Fifty years
later, Kanhagi Angria, the commander of the Mahratta fleet, broke off
this connection with the successors of Sivagi, and set up as a pirate
on his own account. Kanhagi not only plundered the native vessels, but
boldly preyed upon the commerce of the European settlements. The ships
of the East India Company, the French Company, and the Dutch were
frequently captured by these pirates.

Tulagi Angria, who succeeded his father, was even bolder and more
successful; and when the man-of-war brig, the Restoration, with twenty
guns and two hundred men, was fitted out to attack him, he defeated
and captured her. After this, he attacked and captured the French
man-of-war Jupitre, with forty guns; and had even the insolence to
assail an English convoy guarded by two men-of-war; the Vigilant, of
sixty-four guns, and the Ruby, of fifty.

The Dutch, in 1735, sent a fleet of seven ships of war, two bomb
vessels, and a strong body of troops against Gheriah. The attack was,
however, repulsed with considerable loss. From that date the pirates
grew bolder and bolder, and were a perfect scourge to the commerce of
Western India.

Charlie Marryat had, of course, frequently heard of the doings of
these noted pirates, and the cry of "Tulagi Angria" at once explained
to him the terror of the master and crew.

"What is it, Mr. Charles, what on earth is the botheration about? Is
it the little ships they're afeared of?"

"Those ships belong to a pirate called Tulagi Angria," Charlie said,
"and I am very much afraid, Tim, that we are likely to see the inside
of his fortress."

"But shure, yer honor, we're not afeared of those four little boats."

"We are, Tim, and very much afraid, too. Each of those boats, as you
call them, carries four or five times as many men as this ship. They
are well armed, while we have only those two little guns, which are
useless except for show. If the crew were Englishmen, we might attempt
a defence, although even then the odds would be terribly against us;
but with these natives, it is hopeless to think of it, and the attempt
would only ensure our throats being cut."

It was clear that the idea of resistance did never even enter the
minds of the crew of the trader. Some ran to and fro, with
gesticulations and cries of despair. Some threw themselves upon the
deck of the vessel, tore their hair, and rolled as if in convulsions.
Some sat down quietly, with the air of apathetic resignation, with
which the natives of India are used to meet what they consider the
inevitable.

Hossein, who, at the first alarm, had bounded to his feet with his
hand on his knife, subsided into an attitude of indifference, when he
saw that Charlie did not intend making any defence.

"It's mighty lucky," Tim said, "that yer honor left all your presents
to be forwarded to Madras. I thought you were wrong, Mr. Charles, when
you advised me to send them thousand rupees the rajah gave me, along
with your money. A hundred pounds wasn't a sum that Tim Kelly was
likely to handle again in a hurry, and it went agin the grain with me,
to part with them out of my hands. Sure and it's well I took yer
honor's advice."

The four Sepoy officers also exchanged a few words with Charlie. They,
too, would have resisted, had he given the word, hopeless though the
effort would have been. But they acquiesced, at once, in his decision.
They had little to lose; but the thought of a prolonged captivity, and
of being obliged, perhaps, to enter the service of the Mahratta
freebooters, just when about to return to their wives and families at
Madras, was a terrible blow to them.

"Keep up your spirits," Charlie said. "It is a bad business, but we
must hope for the best. If we bide our time, we may see some chance of
escape. You had better lay down your arms in a pile, here. Then we
will sit down quietly, and await their coming on board. They will be
here in a minute, now."

Scarcely had the seven passengers taken their seats in a group, on the
poop, when the freebooters ranged alongside, and swarmed over the
sides onto the deck. Beyond bestowing a few kicks upon the crew, they
paid no attention whatever to them; but tore off the hatches, and at
once proceeded to investigate the contents of the hold. The greater
portion of this consisted of native grains, but there were several
bales of merchandise, consigned by traders at Calicut for Ceylon. The
cargo was, in fact, rather more valuable than that generally found in
a native coaster, and the pirates were satisfied.

The leader of the party, leaving to his followers the task of
examining the hold, walked towards the group on the poop. They rose at
his approach.

"Who are you?" the Mahratta asked.

"I am an officer in the English Company's service," Charlie said, "as
are these five natives. The other Englishman is a soldier, under my
orders."

"Good," the Mahratta said, emphatically. "Tulagi Angria will be glad
to have you. When your people capture any of our men, which is not
often, they hang them. Tulagi is glad to have people he can hang,
too."

After being stripped of any small valuables on their persons, the
captives were taken on board one of the pirate boats. A score of the
Mahrattas remained in charge of the trader. Her head was turned north,
and, accompanied by the four Mahratta boats, she proceeded up the
coast again. Another trader was captured on the way, but two others
evaded the pirates, by running into the port of Calicut.

The trader was a slow sailer, and they were eight days before they
approached Gheriah. Early in the morning a heavy cannonade was heard
in the distance, causing the greatest excitement among the Mahrattas.
Every sail was hoisted, the sweeps got out and, leaving the trader to
jog along in their rear, the four light craft made their way rapidly
along the coast. The firing became heavier and heavier, and as it
became light, three large ships could be seen, about two miles ahead,
surrounded by a host of smaller craft.

"That's a big fight, Mr. Charles," Tim exclaimed. "It reminds me of
three big bulls in a meadow, attacked by a host of little curs."

"It does, Tim; but the curs can bite. What a fire they are keeping up.
But those warships ought to thrash any number of them. Count the
ports, I can see them now."

"The biggest one," Tim said, "has got twenty-five."

"Yes; and the others eighteen and nine. They are two frigates, one of
fifty and the other of thirty-six guns; and a sloop of eighteen. I
can't make out the colours, but I don't think they're English."

"They're not English, yer honor," Tim said confidently, "or they would
soon make an end of them varmint that's tormenting them."

The scene, as the boats approached, was very exciting. The three ships
were pouring their broadsides, without intermission, into the pirate
fleet. This consisted of vessels of all sizes, from the Jupitre and
Restoration, down to large rowing galleys. Although many were sunk,
and more greatly damaged by the fire of the Dutch, they swarmed round
the great ships with wonderful tenacity; and, while the larger vessels
fought their guns against those of the men-of-war, the smaller ones
kept close to them, avoiding as much as possible their formidable
broadsides, but keeping up a perpetual musketry fire at their bulwarks
and tops, throwing stink pots, and shooting burning arrows through the
ports; and getting alongside under the muzzles of the guns, and trying
to climb up into the ports.

The four newly arrived craft joined in the fray.

"This is mighty unpleasant, yer honor," Tim said, as a shot from one
of the Dutch men-of-war struck the craft they were in, crashing a hole
through her bulwarks, and laying five or six of her crew upon the
deck, killed or wounded by the splinters. "Here we are, in the middle
of a fight in which we've no consarn whatever, and which is carried on
without asking our will or pleasure; and we are as likely to be killed
by a Christian shot, as these hathen niggers.

"Hear them yell, yer honor. A faction fight's nothing to it. Look, yer
honor, look! There's smoke curling up from a hatchway of the big ship.
If they haven't set her afire!"

It was as Tim said. A cloud of black smoke was rising from the Dutch
fifty-gun frigate. A wild yell of triumph broke from the Mahrattas.
The fire of their guns upon her redoubled, while that from the
man-of-war died away, as the crew were called off to assist in
extinguishing the flames. Now the smaller boats pressed still more
closely round her, and a rain of missiles was poured through the open
ports. Several times the Mahrattas climbed on board, but each time
were driven out again. The smoke rose thicker and thicker, and tongues
of flame could be seen shooting up.

"She is doomed," Charlie exclaimed. "Even if unmolested, the crew
could not extinguish the fire, now. It has got too much hold.

"Ah! The other frigate is on fire now."

Fresh yells of triumph rose from the Mahrattas. On board the sloop
every sail was hoisted, in spite of the continued fire of muskets and
arrows, which killed many of the sailors employed. The Jupitre,
however, ran alongside her and grappled with her, and a furious combat
could be seen proceeding on the decks. Meanwhile, the flames mounted
higher and higher on board the two frigates. The crew now could be
seen leaping overboard from the ports, choosing any death rather than
that by fire.

It was but a choice. Many were drowned, the rest cut or shot down by
the Mahrattas. Down came the Dutch flag, fluttering from the masthead
of the sloop, and the wild Mahratta yell proclaimed that the victory
was everywhere complete.

The frigates were now a sheet of flames, and the Mahratta craft drew
away from them; until, with two tremendous explosions, their magazines
blew up and they sank beneath the waters.

"I should scarcely have believed it possible," Charlie said, "that
three fine ships of war, mounting a hundred and four guns, could be
destroyed by a fleet of pirates, however numerous. Well, Tim, there is
no doubt that these natives can fight, when well led. It is just as
well, you see, that we did not attempt to offer any resistance, in
that clumsy craft we were on board."

"You're right there, yer honor. They would have aten us up in five
minutes. It makes my heart bleed, to think of the sailors of those two
fine ships. I don't believe that a soul has escaped; but in the small
one, some may have been taken prisoners."

When the fight was over, the craft in which were the captives ran
alongside the flagship of the pirate leader, and the captain reported
to him the capture he had made. Fortunately, Tulagi Angria was in a
high state of delight, at the victory he had just won; and, instead of
ordering them to be instantly executed, he told the captain to take
them on to Suwarndrug, and to imprison them there until his arrival.
He himself, with the rest of his fleet, and the captured Dutch sloop,
sailed into Gheriah; and the craft, in which Charlie and his
companions were imprisoned, continued her course to the island
stronghold of the pirates.

Suwarndrug was built on a rocky island. It lay within gunshot of the
shore. Here, when Kanhagi Angria had first revolted from the authority
of the Mahratta kingdom, the ruler of the Deccan had caused three
strong forts to be built, in order to reduce the island fort. The
pirates, however, had taken the initiative, and had captured these
forts; as well as the whole line of seacoast, a hundred and twenty
miles in length; and the country behind, twenty or thirty miles broad,
extending to the foot of the mountains.

On their arrival at Suwarndrug, the prisoners were handed over to the
governor, and were imprisoned in one of the casemates of the fort. The
next day, they were taken out and ordered to work; and, for weeks,
they laboured at the fortifications, with which the pirates were
strengthening their already naturally strong position. The labour was
very severe, but it was a consolation to the captives that they were
kept together.

By Charlie's advice they exerted themselves to the utmost, and thus
succeeded in pleasing their masters, and in escaping with but a small
share of the blows, which were liberally distributed among other
prisoners, native and European, employed upon the work. Charlie,
indeed, was appointed as a sort of overseer; having under him not only
his own party, but thirty others, of whom twenty were natives, and ten
English sailors, who had been captured in a merchantman. Although
closely watched, he was able to cheer these men, by giving them a hope
that a chance of escape from their captivity might shortly arrive. All
expressed their readiness to run any risk to regain their liberty.

From what he heard the pirates say, Charlie learned that they were
expecting an attack from an expedition which was preparing at Bombay.
The English sailors were confined in a casemate, adjoining that
occupied by Charlie and his companions. The guard kept over them was
but nominal, as it was considered impossible that they could escape
from the island, off which lay a large fleet of the pirate vessels.

One morning upon starting to work they perceived, by the stir in the
fortress, that something unusual was taking place; and presently, on
reaching the rampart, they saw in the distance a small squadron
approaching. They could make out that it consisted of a ship of
forty-four guns, one of sixteen, and two bomb vessels, together with a
fleet of native craft.

The pirate fleet were all getting up sail.

"It's a bold thing, Tim, to attack this fortress with only two ships,
when the pirates have lately beaten a Dutch squadron mounting double
the number of guns."

"Ah, yer honor, but then there is the Union Jack floating at the
masthead. Do you think the creeturs don't know the differ?"

"But the Dutchmen are good sailors, and fought well, Tim. I think the
difference is that in the last case they attacked the Dutch, while in
the present we are attacking them. It makes all the difference in the
world, with Indians. Let them attack you, and they'll fight bravely
enough. Go right at them, and they're done for.

"Look, the pirate fleet are already sailing away."

"And do you think the English will take the fort, yer honor?"

"I don't know, Tim. The place is tremendously strong, and built on a
rock. There are guns which bear right down on the ships, if they
venture in close, while theirs will do but little damage to these
solidly built walls. Suwarndrug ought to resist a fleet ten times as
strong as that before us."

"Shure then, yer honor, and will we have to remain here all our lives,
do ye think?"

"No, Tim, I hope not. Besides, I think that we ought to be able to
render some assistance to them."

"And how will we do it, yer honor? You have but to spake the word, and
Tim Kelly is ready to go through fire and water; and so is Hossein. Ye
may be shure of that."

Seeing that the pirates were now mustering round their guns, and that
the ships were ranging up for action, Charlie thought it prudent to
retire. Hitherto no attention had been paid to them, but 'twas
probable enough that, when the pirates' blood became heated by the
fight, they would vent their fury upon their captives. He therefore
advised not only the native officers, but the sailors, to retire to
their casemates; which, as the guns placed in them did not command the
position taken up by the ships, were at presented untenanted by any of
the garrison.

Presently the noise of guns proclaimed that the engagement had begun.
The boom of the cannon of the ships was answered by an incessant fire
from the far more numerous artillery of the fortress, while now and
then a heavy explosion, close at hand, told of the bursting of the
bombs from the mortar vessels, in the fortress.

Charlie had been thinking of the best measures to be taken, to aid his
friends, ever since the squadron came in sight; and, after sitting
quietly for half an hour, he called his officers around him.

"I am convinced," he said, "that if unaided from within, the ships
will have no chance whatever of taking this fortress; but I think that
we may help them. The upper fort, which contains the magazine,
commands the whole of the interior. But its guns do not bear upon the
ships where they are anchored. Probably the place, at present, is
almost deserted. As no one pays any attention to us, I propose, with
Tim Kelly and the ten English sailors, to seize it. We can close the
gate, and discharge the guns upon the defenders of the sea face. We
could not, of course, defend it for five minutes if they attacked us;
but we would threaten to blow up the magazine, if they did so.

"I propose that, tomorrow morning, you four and Hossein shall strip to
your loincloths, and just before it becomes light go along the walls,
and stop up, with pieces of wood, the touch holes of as many of the
cannon as you can. It would not do to use nails, even if we had them.
No one will notice, in the dark, that you are not Mahrattas; and if
you scatter about, you may each manage to close up four or five guns,
at least. It is, I know, a desperate service, and if discovered you
will be instantly killed. But if it succeeds the pirates, scared by
discovering, just as our ships open fire, that a number of their guns
are disabled; while we take them in the rear, from the fort behind,
may not improbably surrender at once. At any rate, it's worth trying;
and I, for one, would rather run the risk of being killed, than be
condemned to pass my life the slave of these pirates, who may at any
moment cut our throats, in case of any reverse happening to them."

The four native officers at once stated their willingness to join in
the plan. Hossein did not consider any reply necessary. With him, it
was a matter of course to do whatever Charlie suggested.

The latter then went into the next casemate, and unfolded his plan to
the sailors, who heartily agreed to make an effort for their liberty.

The fire continued all day unabated; and at nightfall, when a man, as
usual, brought the captives food, he exultingly told them that no
damage whatever had been effected by the guns of the fleet.

In the evening, the party cut a number of pieces of wood; these,
measuring by the cannon in the casemate, they made of just sufficient
size and length to push down, with a slight effort, through the touch
hole. When pushed down to their full length, they touched the interior
of the cannon below, and were just level with the top of the touch
hole. Thus, it would be next to impossible to extricate them in a
hurry. They might, indeed, be broken and forced in by a solid punch,
of the same size as the touch hole; but this would take time, and
would not be likely to occur, on the moment, to the pirates.

The skewers, for this is what they resembled, were very strong and
tough; being made of slips of bamboo. The prisoners had all knives,
which they used for cutting their food. With these the work was
accomplished.

Towards morning the five natives, with the skewers hidden away in
their loincloths, and their turbans twisted in Mahratta fashion, stole
out from the casemate. Charlie had ordered that, in case they should
see that the ships had drawn off from the position they occupied on
the preceding day, they should return without attempting to carry out
their task.

He himself, with Tim, joined the sailors; and, first ascending the
ramparts and seeing that the ships were still at anchor, abreast of
the fort, he and his comrades strolled across the interior of the
fort, in the direction of the magazine. They did not keep together,
nor did all move directly towards the position which they wished to
gain.

The place was already astir. Large numbers of the pirates thronged the
interior. Groups were squatted round fires, busy in cooking their
breakfasts. Numbers were coming from the magazine, with powder to fill
up the small magazines on the walls. Others, again, were carrying shot
from the pyramids of missiles, piled up here and there in the
courtyard. None paid any attention to the English prisoners.

Presently a dull boom was heard. There was a whistling sound; and with
a thud, followed by a loud explosion, a bomb fell and burst in the
open space.

This was the signal for action. The pirates, in a moment, hurried down
to the bastions overlooking the sea; and the Englishmen gathered, in a
group, near the entrance to the magazine. Besides their knives they
had no arms, but each had picked up two or three heavy stones.

A minute after the explosion of the shell, the cannonade of the ships
broke out. It was answered by only a few guns from the fortress, and
yells of astonishment and rage were heard to arise.

A moment later, five natives ran up to the group of Englishmen. Their
work had been well done, and more than three-fourths of the guns on
the sea face had been rendered temporarily useless.

Charlie gave the word, and with a rush they entered the upper fort.
There were but two or three men there, who were just hurrying out with
their bags of powder. These, before they realized the position, were
instantly knocked down and bound. The gate of the fort was then shut
and barred, and the party ran up to the bastion above.

Not a single pirate was to be seen there. The six guns, which stood
there, were at once loaded with grape; and a heavy discharge was
poured into the crowded masses of pirates, upon the bastions on the
sea face. These, already greatly disturbed at finding that most of
their guns had, in some way, been rendered useless; were panic
stricken at this sudden and unexpected attack from the rear. Many of
them broke from their guns and fled to shelter, others endeavoured to
turn their cannon to bear upon the magazine.

The wildest confusion raged. At last some of their leaders rallied the
men; and, with yells of fury, a rush was made towards the magazine.
They were received with another discharge of grape, which took
terrible effect. Many recoiled, but their leaders, shouting to them
that the guns were discharged, and there were but a dozen men there,
led them on again.

Charlie leaped upon the edge of the parapet, and shouted:

"If you attack us, we will blow up the magazine. I have but to lift my
hand, and the magazine will be fired."

The boldest of the assailants were paralysed by the threat. Confusion
reigned throughout the fortress. The fleet kept up their fire with
great vigour; judging, by the feebleness of the reply, that something
unusual must be happening within the walls. The gunners, disheartened
by finding their pieces useless, and unable to extract the wooden
plugs, while Charlie's men continued to ply them with grape, left
their guns and, with the greater portion of the garrison, disorganized
and panic stricken, retired into shelter.

A shell from the ships, falling on to a thatched building, set it on
fire. The flames rapidly spread, and soon all the small huts occupied
by the garrison were in flames. The explosion of a magazine added to
the terror of the garrison, and the greater portion of them, with the
women and children, ran down to the water; and, taking boats,
attempted to cross to Fort Goa, on the mainland. They were, however,
cut off by the English boats, and captured.

Commodore James, who commanded the squadron, now directed his fire at
Fort Goa; which was being feebly attacked, on the land side, by a
Mahratta force; which had been landed from the Mahratta fleet,
accompanying the English ships, a few miles down the coast. The fort
shortly surrendered; but while the Mahrattas were marching to take
possession, the governor, with some of his best men, took boat and
crossed over to the island; of which, although the fire had ceased
after the explosion of the magazine, the English had not taken
possession.

The fire from its guns again opened, and as Commodore James thought it
probable that the pirates would, in the night, endeavour to throw in
large reinforcements, he determined to carry it by storm. The ships
opened fire upon the walls; and, under cover of this, half the seamen
were landed. These ran up to the gate, and thundered at it with their
axes.

Charlie and his companions aided the movement, by again opening a
heavy fire of grape upon the guns which bore upon the sally port; and
when the gates were forced the garrison, utterly dispirited by the
crossfire to which they were subjected, at once laid down their arms.



