PREFACE.


In the following pages I have endeavoured to give a vivid picture of
the wonderful events of the ten years, which at their commencement saw
Madras in the hands of the French--Calcutta at the mercy of the Nabob
of Bengal--and English influence apparently at the point of extinction
in India--and which ended in the final triumph of the English, both in
Bengal and Madras. There were yet great battles to be fought, great
efforts to be made, before the vast Empire of India fell altogether
into British hands; but these were but the sequel of the events I have
described.

The historical details are, throughout the story, strictly accurate,
and for them I am indebted to the history of these events written by
Mr. Orme, who lived at that time, to the "Life of Lord Clive,"
recently published by Lieutenant Colonel Malleson, and to other
standard authorities. In this book I have devoted a somewhat smaller
space to the personal adventures of my hero than in my other
historical tales, but the events themselves were of such a thrilling
and exciting nature that no fiction could surpass them.

A word as to the orthography of the names and places. An entirely new
method of spelling Indian words has lately been invented by the Indian
authorities. This is no doubt more correct than the rough-and-ready
orthography of the early traders, and I have therefore adopted it for
all little-known places. But there are Indian names which have become
household words in England, and should never be changed; and as it
would be considered a gross piece of pedantry and affectation on the
part of a tourist on the Continent, who should, on his return, say he
had been to Genova, Firenze, and Wien, instead of Genoa, Florence, and
Vienna; it is, I consider, an even worse offence to transform Arcot,
Cawnpoor, and Lucknow, into Arkat, Kahnpur, and Laknao. I have tried,
therefore, so far as possible, to give the names of well-known
personages and places in the spelling familiar to Englishmen, while
the new orthography has been elsewhere adopted.

G. A. Henty.



