CHAPTER 15. CONCLUSION.

The longer these two boys were together, the more they wished they could
spend their lives side by side; or, at least, not be separated by half
the globe.  Just before the Christmas holidays, some news arrived which
startled them so much that they could hardly speak to one another about
it for some hours.  There was a deep feeling in their hearts which
disposed them to speak alone to the Ruler of their lives, before they
could even rejoice with one another.  When they meditated upon it, they
saw that the event had come about naturally enough; but it so exactly
met the strongest desire they had in the world, that if a miracle had
happened before their eyes, they could not have been more struck.

Holt's father wrote a letter to Mr Proctor, which reached its
destination through Mr Tooke's hands; and Mr Tooke was consulted in
the whole matter, and requested by Mr Proctor to tell the two boys and
Phil all about it.  These three were therefore called into Mr Tooke's
study one day, to hear some news.

The letters which Mr Tooke read were about Hugh.  Mr Holt explained
that his son's best years were to be spent, like his own, in India; that
his own experience had made him extremely anxious that his son should be
associated with companions whom he could respect and love; and that he
had long resolved to use such interest as he had in bringing out only
such a youth, or youths, as he could wish his son to associate with.  He
mentioned that he was aware that one lad now at Crofton was destined for
India--

"That is Lamb," whispered the boys to each other.

But that he did not hear of any friendship formed, or likely to be
formed with advantage between his son and this young gentleman.

"No, indeed!" muttered Holt.

There was one boy, however, Mr Holt went on to say, to whom his son
seemed to be attached, and concerning whom he had related circumstances
which inspired a strong interest, and which seemed to afford an
expectation of an upright manhood following a gallant youth.

Here all the boys reddened, and Hugh looked hard at the carpet.

This boy had evidently a strong inclination for travel and adventure;
and though his lameness put military or naval service out of the
question, it might not unfit him for civil service in India.  If Mr
Tooke could give such a report of his health, industry, and capability
as should warrant his being offered an appointment, and if his parents
were willing so to dispose of him, Mr Holt was anxious to make
arrangements for the education of the boys proceeding together, in order
to their being companions in their voyage and subsequent employments.
And then followed some account of what these arrangements were to be.

"Now, Proctor," said Mr Tooke to the breathless Hugh, "you must
consider what you have to say to this.  Your parents are willing to
agree if you are.  But if," he continued, with a kind smile, "it would
make you very unhappy to go to India, no one will force your
inclinations."

"Oh, sir," said Hugh, "I will work very hard,--I will work as hard as
ever I can, if I may go."

"Well: you may go, you see, if you will work hard.  You can consider it
quietly, or talk it over with your brother and Holt; and to-morrow you
are to dine at your uncle's, where you will meet your father; and he and
you will settle what to write to Mr Holt, by the next ship."

"And you, sir," said Phil, anxiously--"Mr Holt asks your opinion."

"My opinion is that your brother can be what he pleases.  He wants some
inducement to pursue his learning more strenuously than he has done
yet--"

"I will, sir.  I will," indeed, cried Hugh.

"I believe you will.  Such a prospect as this will be an inducement, if
anything can.  You are, on the whole, a brave boy; and brave boys are
not apt to be ungrateful to God or man; and I am sure you think it would
be ungrateful, both to God and man, to refuse to do your best in the
situation which gratifies the first wish of your heart."

Hugh could not say another word.  He made his lowest bow, and went
straight to his desk.  As the first fruits of his gratitude, he learned
his lessons thoroughly well that night; much as he would have liked to
spend the time in dreaming.

His father and he had no difficulty in settling what to write to Mr
Holt; and very merry were they together when the business was done.  In
a day or two, when Hugh had had time to think, he began to be glad on
Tooke's account; and he found an opportunity of saying to him one day,--

"I never should have gone to India if I had not lost my foot; and I
think it is well worth while losing my foot to go to India."

"Do you really?  Or do you say it because--"

"I think so really."  And then he went off into such a description as
convinced Tooke that he was in earnest, though it was to be feared that
he would be disappointed by experience.  But then again, Mr Tooke was
heard to say that one chief requisite for success and enjoyment in
foreign service of any kind was a strong inclination for it.  So Tooke
was consoled, and easier in mind than for a whole year past.

Hugh was able to keep his promise of working hard.  Both at Crofton and
at the India College, where his education was finished, he studied well
and successfully; and when he set sail with his companion, it was with a
heart free from all cares but one.  Parting from his family was
certainly a great grief; and he could not forget the last tone he had
heard from Agnes.  But this was his only sorrow.  He was, at last, on
the wide sea, and going to Asia.  Holt was his dear friend.  He had left
none but well-wishers behind.  His secret was his own; (though, indeed,
he scarcely remembered that he had any secret;) and he could not but be
conscious that he went out well prepared for honourable duty.

THE END.
