CHAPTER 34. THE MATCH AGAINST THE COUNTY.

The boys, astounded and bewildered by this unexpected revelation, slowly
rose to obey the Doctor's order, leaving Loman alone with the head
master.

The boy was ashy pale as Dr Senior turned to him and said, solemnly--

"How do you account for this, Loman?"

Loman lowered his eyes and made no reply.

"Answer me please, Loman.  Can you account for this?"

"No."

"Did you ever see this paper before?"

"No."

"Do you know how it came into your Juvenal?"

"No."

"Did you know anything at all about the lost paper?"

"No."

The Doctor looked long and searchingly at him as he said once more--

"Loman, are you sure you are telling me the truth?  You know nothing
whatever about the paper--never saw it before this moment?"

"No."

"You knew the paper had been missed off my desk?"

"Yes."

"Had you the least reason for believing any boy took it?"

Loman hesitated.

"I would rather not say," he said at last.

"You must please answer me frankly, Loman.  Had you any reason, I ask,
for believing any boy took the paper?"

"Must I say?" asked Loman.

"Yes--you must."

"Well, then, I did fancy some one had taken it."

"Who?"

"Greenfield senior," said Loman, flushing quickly as he said the name.

"And what made you suspect Greenfield senior?"

"All the boys suspected him."

"That is not an answer, Loman.  Why?"

"Because, for one thing," said Loman, sullenly, "he was seen coming out
of your study that evening."

"And why else?"

"Because he came out so high in the exam."

"And for these reasons you suspected Greenfield of taking the paper?
Why did you not mention the matter to me?"

Loman did his best to look virtuous.

"I did not wish to get any one into trouble."

"And you preferred to let an affair like this go on without taking any
steps to have it cleared up?  Did Greenfield deny the charge?"

"No."

"Did he admit it?"

"Very nearly.  He wouldn't speak to any one for months."

"And you really believe that Greenfield took the paper?"

Loman looked up at the Doctor for a moment and answered, "Yes."

"Did you lend him your Juvenal at any time?"

"Not that I remember."

"Do you suppose he put the paper in the book?"

"I couldn't say; but I don't see who else could."

"That will do, Loman; you can go.  Kindly leave the paper and the
Juvenal with me."

Loman turned to go, but the Doctor stopped him with one more question.

"You know, I suppose, that the questions which you actually had set for
the Nightingale examination were quite different from those on the
paper?"

"Yes," said Loman.  "I mean--that is," he added, stammering, and taking
up the paper in question.  "I see by this paper they were quite
different."

"Yes; you can go now, Loman."

There was something so solemn and hard in the head master's voice as he
dismissed the boy that Loman felt very uncomfortable as he slowly
departed to his own study.

_He_, at any rate, was in no humour for enjoying the big football match
which was just beginning.

And it must be confessed the event of the morning had had the effect of
disconcerting a good many more than himself.  Stansfield had quite hard
work going round among his troops and rousing them once more to the
proper pitch of enthusiasm.

"What--whatever does it matter," he said, "if the fellow did take it?
_You_ didn't take it, Winter, or you, Wren; and what on earth's the use
of getting down in the mouth, and perhaps losing the match, because of
it?  We're always having our football spoiled by something or other," he
added with a groan.  "I'll tell you what it is, let's only lick these
fellows this afternoon, and then I'll howl and groan and do anything you
like, for a week."

There was no resisting such a generous offer.  The fellows made up their
minds to forget everything else that afternoon but the County, and so to
play that the County should have some difficulty in soon forgetting
them.

"Fire away, you fellows, and peel!" cried Stansfield, as Oliver and
Wraysford sauntered past.

They fired away.  But while dressing they exchanged a few words on the
forbidden subject.

"Did you ever expect it would be brought home to Loman like this, Noll?"
asked Wray.

"No, I didn't.  And yet in a way--"

"Eh?  What do you say?"

"Why, Wray, you remember me saying that evening, after I left the study,
the only fellow I met in the passage besides Simon was Loman?"

"Yes; so you did."

"He was going towards the Doctor's study," said Oliver.

"Hum!  I remember now you said so."

"And yet," continued Oliver, plunging into his jersey--"and yet I can't
see how, if he did take the paper, he didn't do better in the exam.  He
came out so very low."

"Yes, that's queer, unless he took a fit of repentance all of a sudden,
and didn't look at it."

"Then it's queer he didn't destroy it, instead of sticking it in his
Juvenal."

"Well, I suppose the Doctor will clear it up, now he's on the scent."

"I suppose so," said Oliver; "but, I say, old man," he added, "of course
there's no need for us to say anything about it to anybody.  The poor
beggar doesn't want _our_ help to get him into trouble."

"No, indeed.  I'd be as glad, quite, if it were found to be another
wrong scent, after all," said Wraysford.  "The fellow's in a bad enough
way as it is."

"Are you nearly ready, you two?" thundered Stansfield at the door.

"Just ready!" they exclaimed; and in another minute they, too, had
dismissed from their minds everything but Saint Dominic's versus County,
as they trotted off to join the rest of their comrades on the field of
battle.

And, indeed, for the next two hours there was no opportunity, even, had
they desired it, for any one to think of anything but this momentous
struggle.

For three years running the County had beaten the schoolboys, each time
worse than before, until at last the latter had got to be afraid the
others would begin to think them foemen not worthy of their steel.  This
year they hardly dared hope a better fate than before, for the enemy
were down in force.  Yet the boys had determined to die hard, and at
least give their adversaries all the trouble they could before their
goal should fall; and of this they were all the more sanguine, because
their team was the very best the school could muster, and not a man
among them but knew his business, and could be depended on to do it too.

Bad luck!  Of course, just when it's not wanted there's a breeze got up,
blowing right down the field, and in the very teeth of the schoolboys,
who have lost the toss, and have to play from the oak-tree end for the
first half of the game!

"It's always the way," growls Ricketts.  "They'll simply eat us up while
they've got the chance, you see!"

"No they won't," says Stansfield, bound to take a cheerful view of
things.  "We're strong in backs.  It's not like last match, when
Greenfield wasn't playing, and Loman was there to make such a mess of
it."

"Well, it's a comfort, that, anyhow."

"Of course it is," says the captain.  "What you fellows have got to do
is to keep the ball in close, and nurse it along all the while, or else
run--but you'd better let the quarter-backs do that."

This sage advice is not thrown away on the worthies who lead the van for
Saint Dominic's, and an opportunity for putting it into practice occurs
the moment the game begins.  For the School has to kick-off, and to
kick-off against that wind is a hopeless business.  Stansfield does not
attempt anything like a big kick, but just drives the ball hard and low
on to the legs of the County forwards, sending his own men close after
it, so that a scrimmage is formed almost at the very spot where the ball
grounds.

"Now, School, sit on it!  Do you hear?" calls out the captain; and
certainly it looks as if that unhappy ball were never destined to see
the light again.  The enemy's forwards cannot get it out from among the
feet of the School forwards, try all they will, until, by sheer weight,
they simply force it through.  And then, when it does go through, there
is young Forrester of the Fourth ready for it, and next moment it is
back in its old place in the middle of the "mush."  In due time, out it
comes again--this time on Wren's side--and once again, after a short
run, there it is again, on almost the identical spot of earth where it
has undergone its last two poundings.

"Played up, Dominies!" cries out Stansfield, cheerily.  "Stick to it
now!"

Stick to it they do, with the wind fresh on their faces, and the County
fellows charging and plunging and shoving like fury upon them.

Ah! there goes the ball, out at the County end for a wonder.  The
spectators cheer loudly for the schoolboys.  Little they know!  It had
much better have stayed there among their feet than roll out into the
open.  The County quarter-back has it in his hands in a twinkling, and
in another twinkling he has lifted it with a drop-kick high into the
air, all along the wind, which carries it, amid cheers and shouts, right
up to the boundary of the School goal.

So much for cutting through the scrimmage!

Wraysford, the Dominican "back," is ready for it when it drops, and,
without touching-down, runs out with it.  He is a cautious fellow, is
Wraysford, and does not often try this game.  But the ball has far
outstripped the enemy's forwards, and so he has a pretty open field.
But not for long.  In a _few_ seconds the County is upon him, and he and
the ball are no longer visible.  Then follow a lot more scrimmages, with
similar results.  It is awfully slow for the spectators, but Stansfield
rejoices over it, and the County men chafe.

"Can't you let it out there?  Play looser, and let it through," says
their captain.

Loose it is.

"That's better!" says the County captain, as presently the ball comes
out with a bound full into the quarter-back's hands, who holds it, and,
to the horror of the boys, makes his mark before he can be collared.

The scrimmage has been near up to the Dominican goal--within a kick--and
now, as the schoolboys look round first at the goal and then at the
County man with the ball, the distance looks painfully small.  And even
if it were greater, this wind would do the business.

The County man takes plenty of room back from his mark, up to which the
School forwards stand ready for one desperate rush the moment the ball
touches the ground.  Alas, it is no go!  They have a knowing hand and a
quick foot to deal with.  Before they can cover the few yards which
divide them, the ball is dropped beautifully, and flies, straight as an
arrow, over the cross-bar, amid the tremendous cheers of the County men
and their friends.

"Never mind!" says Stansfield, as his men walk out once more to the
fray, "they shan't get another before half-time!"

Won't they?  Such is the perversity of that creature people call Luck,
and such is the hatred it has for anything like a boast, that two
minutes--only two minutes--after the words are out of the captain's
mouth another Dominican goal has fallen.

For Stansfield in kicking off gets his foot too much under the ball,
which consequently rises against the wind and presents an easy catch to
any one who comes out to take it.  A County forward sees his chance.
Rushing up, he catches the ball, and instantaneously, so it seems,
drop-kicks it, a tremendous kick clean over the School goal, before even
the players have all taken up their places after the last catastrophe.

This is dreadful! worse than ever!  Never in their worst days had such a
thing happened.  For once in a way Stansfield's hopefulness deserts him,
and he feels the School is in for an out-and-out hiding.

The captain would like extremely to blow some one up, if he only knew
whom.  It is so aggravating sometimes to have no one to blow-up.
Nothing relieves the feelings so, does it?

However, Stansfield has to bottle up his feelings, and, behold! once
more he and his men are in battle array.

This time it's steady all again, and the ball is kept well out of sight.
It can't even slip out behind now, as before; for the School
quarter-backs are up to that dodge, and ready to pounce upon it before
it can be lifted or sent flying.  Indeed, the only chance the wretched
ball has of seeing daylight is--

Hullo! half-time!

The announcement falls on joyful ears among the Dominicans.  They have
worked hard and patiently against heavy odds; and they feel they really
deserve this respite.

Now, at last, if the wind wouldn't change for them, they have changed
over to the wind, which blows no longer in their faces, but gratefully
on to their backs.

The kick-off is a positive luxury under such circumstances; Stansfield
needn't be afraid of skying the ball now, and he isn't.  It shoots up
with a prodigious swoop and soars right away to touch-line, so that the
County's "back" is the first of their men to go into action.  He brings
the ball back deftly and prettily, slipping in and out among his own
men, who get beside him as a sort of bodyguard, ready at any moment to
carry on the ball.  It is ludicrous to see Ricketts and Winter and
Callonby flounder about after him.  The fellow is like an eel.  One
moment you have him, the next he's away; now you're sure of him, now
he's out of all reach.  Ah!  Stansfield's got him at last!  No he
hasn't; but Winter has--No, Winter has lost him; and--just look--he's
past all the School forwards, no one can say how.

Young Forrester tackles him gamely--but young Forrester is no hand at
eel-catching; in fact, the eel catches Forrester, and leaves him
gracefully on his back.  Past the quarter-backs!  The man has a charmed
life!

Ah!  Greenfield has got him at last.  Yes, Mr Eel, you may wriggle as
hard as you like, but you'd hardly find your way out of that grip
without leave!

Altogether this is a fine run, and makes the School see that even with
the wind they are not going to have it all their own way.  However, they
warm up wonderfully after this.

Steady is still the word (what grand play we should get if it were
always the word at football, you schoolboys!  You may kick and run and
scrimmage splendidly, but you are not steady--but this is digression).
Steady is still the word, and _every_ minute Saint Dominic's pulls
better together.  The forwards work like one man, and, lighter weight
though they are, command the scrimmages by reason of their good
"packing."

Wren and young Forrester, the quarter-backs, are "dead on" the ball the
moment it peeps out from the scrimmage; and behind them at half-back
Oliver and Bullinger are not missing a chance.  If they did, Wraysford
is behind them, a prince of "backs."

Oh, for a chance to put this fine machinery into motion!  Time is
flying, and the umpire is already fidgeting with his watch.  Oh, for one
chance!  And while we speak here it comes.  A County man has just darted
up along the touch-line half the length of the field.  Wren goes out to
meet him, and behind Wren--too close behind--advances Oliver.  The
County man thinks twice before delivering himself up into the clutches
of one of these heroes, and ends his run with a kick, which, Oliver
being not in his place, Wraysford runs forward to take.  Now Wraysford
has hardly had a run this afternoon.  He means to have one now!  And he
does have one.  He takes the ball flying, gives one hurried look round,
and then makes right for the thick of the fray.  Who backs him up?
Greenfield for one, and all the rest of Saint Dominic's for the other.

"Stick close!" he says to Oliver, as he flies past.  Oliver wants no
bidding.  He follows his man like a shadow.  In and out among the
forwards, and round about past the quarter-backs; and when at last
Wraysford is borne down by a combined force of half and
three-quarter-backs, Greenfield is there to take the ball on.

"Look-out there!" cries the County captain, "mark that man."  The County
does mark that man, and they have the painful task of marking him pass
one half-back and floor another before he is arrested.

"I'm here!" cries Wraysford's voice at that moment; and next instant the
ball is again hurrying on towards the County goal in Wraysford's arms,
Greenfield once more being in close attendance.

And now the County backs come into action, and the first of them collars
Wraysford.  But it is Oliver who collars the ball, and amid the shouts,
and howls, and cheers of players and spectators rushes it still onward.
The second "back" is the County's only remaining hope, nor surely will
he fail.  He rushes at Oliver.  Oliver rushes at him.  Wraysford, once
more on his feet, rushes on them both.

"Look-out for the ball there!" is the panic cry of the County.  Ay, look
indeed!  Oliver is down, but Wraysford has it, and walks with it merrily
over the County's goal-line, and deposits it on the ground in the exact
centre of the posts.

"There never was such a rush-up, or such a pretty piece of double play,"
say the knowing ones among the onlookers; and when a minute later the
ball is brought out, and Stansfield kicks it beautifully over the goal,
every one says that it is one of the best-earned goals that old meadow
has ever seen kicked, and that Saint Dominic's, though beaten, has
nothing in that day's performance to be ashamed of.



