CHAPTER 13. COMPANY AT THE COCKCHAFER.

Cripps's letter was as follows:

"Hon. Sir,--This comes hoping you are well.  You may like to know Sir
Patrick won.  The tip was all out.  Honourable Sir,--My friend would
like his ten pounds sharp, as he's a poor man.  Please call in on
Saturday afternoon.  Your very humble servant, Ben Cripps."

This letter was startling enough to drive fifty _Dominicans_ out of
Loman's head, and for a long time he could hardly realise how bad the
news it contained was.

He had reckoned to a dead certainty on winning the bet which Cripps had
advised him to make with his friend.  Not that Loman knew anything about
racing matters, but Cripps had been so confident, and it seemed so safe
to bet against this one particular horse, that the idea of events
turning out otherwise had never once entered his head.

He went to the door and shouted for Stephen, who presently appeared with
a paper dart in his hand.

"Greenfield," said Loman, "cut down at once to Maltby and bring me a
newspaper."

Stephen stared.

"I've got my lessons to do," he said.

"Leave them here, I'll do them," replied Loman; "look sharp."

Still Stephen hesitated.

"We aren't allowed out after seven without leave," he faltered, longing
to get back to the war preparations in the Fourth Junior.

"I know that, and I give you leave--there!" said Loman, with all the
monitorial dignity he could assume.  This quite disarmed Stephen.  Of
course a monitor could do no wrong, and it was no use objecting on that
score.

Still he was fain to find some other excuse.

"I say, will it do in the morning?" he began.

Loman's only reply was a book shied at his fag's head--quite explicit
enough for all practical purposes.  So Stephen hauled down his colours
and prepared to start.

"Look sharp back," said Loman, "and don't let any one see you going out.
Look here, you can get yourself some brandy-balls with this."

Stephen was not philosopher enough to argue with himself why, if he had
leave to go out, he ought to avoid being seen going out.  He pocketed
Loman's extra penny complacently, and giving one last longing look in
the direction of the Fourth Junior, slipped quietly out of the school
and made the best of his way down to Maltby.

It was not easy at that time of day to get a paper.  Stephen tried half
a dozen stationers' shops, but they were all sold out.  They were
evidently more sought after than brandy-balls, of which he had no
difficulty in securing a pennyworth at an early stage of his pilgrimage.
The man in the sweet-shop told him his only chance of getting a paper
was at the railway station.

So to the station he strolled, with a brandy-ball in each cheek.  Alas!
the stall was closed for the day.

Stephen did not like to be beaten, but there was nothing for it now but
to give up this "paper-chase," and return to Loman with a report of his
ill-success.

As he trotted back up High Street, looking about everywhere but in the
direction in which he was going (as is the habit of small boys), and
wondering in his heart whether his funds could possibly stand the strain
of another pennyworth of brandy-balls, he suddenly found himself in
sharp collision with a man who expressed himself on the subject of
clumsy boys generally in no very measured terms.

Stephen looked up and saw Mr Cripps the younger standing before him.

"Why!" exclaimed that worthy, giving over his irascible expletives, and
adopting an air of unfeigned pleasure, "why, if it ain't young Master
Greenhorn.  Ha, ha!  How do, my young bantam?  Pretty bobbish, eh?"

Stephen did not know exactly what was meant by "bobbish," but replied
that he was quite well, and sorry he had trodden on Mr Cripps's toes.

"Never mind," said Mr Cripps, magnanimously, "you're a light weight.
And so you're taking a dander down town, are you? looking for lollipops,
eh?"

Stephen blushed very red at this.  However had Mr Cripps guessed about
the brandy-balls?

"I came to get a paper for Loman," he said, "but they're all sold out."

"No, are they?  I wonder what Mr Loman wants with a paper, now?"

"He said it was very important, and I was to be sure to get one of
to-day's," said Stephen.  "Do you know where I can get one?"

"Of course.  Come along with me; I've got one at home you can have.  And
so he said it was very important, did he?  That's queer.  There's
nothing in to-day's paper at all.  Only something about a low
horse-race.  He don't want it for that, I guess; eh?"

"Oh, no, I shouldn't think," said Stephen, trotting along beside his
amiable acquaintance.

Mr Cripps was certainly a very friendly man, and as he conducted
Stephen to the Cockchafer, Stephen felt quite a liking for him, and
couldn't understand why Oliver and Wraysford both ran him down.

True, Mr Cripps did use some words which didn't seem exactly proper,
but that Stephen put down to the habit of men in that part.  The man
seemed to take such an interest in boys generally, and in Stephen in
particular, and was so interested and amused to hear all about the
Guinea-pigs, and the _Dominican_, and the Sixth _versus_ School, that
Stephen felt quite drawn out to him.  And then he told Stephen such a
lot of funny stories, and treated him with such evident consideration,
that the small boy felt quite flattered and delighted.

So they reached the Cockchafer.  Here Stephen, whose former visits had
all been to the lock-house, pulled up.

"I say," said he, "is this a public-house?"

"Getting on that way," said Mr Cripps.

"We aren't allowed to go in public-houses," said Stephen, "it's one of
the rules."

"Ah, quite right too; not a good thing for boys at all.  We'll go in by
the private door into my house," said Mr Cripps.

Stephen was not quite comfortable at this evasion, but followed Mr
Cripps by the side door into his bar parlour.

"You won't forget the paper," he said, "please.  I've got to be back in
school directly."

"I'll have a look for it.  Now, I guess you like ginger-beer, don't
you?"

Stephen was particularly partial to ginger-beer, as it happened, and
said so.

"That's the style," said Mr Cripps, producing a bottle.  "Walk into
that while I go and get the paper."

Stephen did walk into it with great relish, and began to think Mr
Cripps quite a gentleman.  He was certain, even if that bat had been a
poor one, it was quite worth the money paid for it, and Oliver was
unjust in calling Cripps hard names.

The landlord very soon returned with the paper.

"Here you are, young governor.  Now don't hurry away.  It's lonely here
all by myself, and I like a young gentleman like you to talk to.  I knew
a nice little boy once, just your age, that used to come and see me
regular once a week and play bagatelle with me.  He was a good player at
it too!"

"Could he get clear-board twice running with two balls?" asked Stephen,
half jealous of the fame of this unknown rival.

"Eh!--no, scarcely that.  He wasn't quite such a dab as that."

"I can do it," said Stephen with a superior smile.

"You?  Not a bit of you!" said Mr Cripps, incredulously.

"Yes, I can," reiterated Stephen, delighted to have astonished his host.

"I must see it before I can believe that," said Mr Cripps.  "Suppose
you show me on my board."

Stephen promptly accepted the challenge, and forgetting in his
excitement all about school rules or Loman's orders accompanied Cripps
to the bagatelle-room, with its sanded floor, smelling of stale tobacco
and beer-dregs.  His first attempt, greatly to Mr Cripps's glee, was
unsuccessful.

"I knew you couldn't," exclaimed that worthy.

"I know I can do it," said Stephen, excitedly.  "Let's try again."

After a few more trials he made the two clear-boards, and Mr Cripps was
duly astonished and impressed.

"That's what I call smart play," said he.  "Now, if I was a betting man,
I'd wager a sixpence you couldn't do it again."

"Yes, I can, but I won't bet," said Stephen.  He did do it again, and
Mr Cripps said it was a good job for him the young swell didn't bet, or
he would have lost his sixpence.  Stephen was triumphant.

How long he would have gone on showing off his prowess to the admiring
landlord of the Cockchafer, and how far he might have advanced in the
art of public-house bagatelle, I cannot say, but the sudden striking of
a clock and the entry of visitors into the room reminded him where he
was.

"I must go back now," he said, hurriedly.

"Must you?  Well, come again soon.  I've a great fancy to learn that
there stoke.  I'm a born fool at bagatelle.  What do you say to another
ginger-beer before you go?"

Stephen said "Thank you," and then taking the newspaper in his hand bade
Cripps good-bye.

"Good-bye, my fine young fellow.  You're one of the right sort, you are.
No stuck-up nonsense about you.  That's why I fancy you.  Bye-bye.  My
love to Mr Loman."

Stephen hurried back to Saint Dominic's as fast as his legs would carry
him.  He was not quite comfortable about his evening's proceedings,
although he was not aware of having done anything wicked.  Loman, a
monitor, had given him leave to go down to Maltby, so that was hardly a
crime; and as to the Cockchafer--well, he had only been in the private
part of the house, and not the public bar, and surely there had been no
harm in drinking ginger-beer and playing bagatelle, especially when he
had distinctly refused to bet on the latter.  But, explain it as he
would, Stephen felt uncomfortable enough to determine him to say as
little as possible about his expedition.

He found Loman impatiently awaiting him.

"Wherever have you been to all this time?" he demanded.

"The papers were all sold out," said Stephen.  "I tried seven places."

Loman had eagerly caught up and opened the paper while Stephen nervously
made this explanation, and he took no further heed of his fag, who
presently, seeing he was no longer wanted, and relieved to get out of
reach of questions, prudently retired.

A glance sufficed to confirm the bad news about the Derby.  Sir Patrick
had won, and it was a fact therefore that Loman owed Cripps and his
friend between them thirty pounds, without the least possibility of
paying them.

One thing was certain.  He must see Cripps on Saturday, and trust to his
luck (though that of late had not been very trustworthy) to pull him
through, somehow.

Alas! what a spirit this, in which to meet difficulties!  Loman had yet
to learn that it is one thing to regret, and another thing to repent;
that it is one thing to call one's self a fool, and another thing,
quite, to cease to be one.

But, as he said to himself, he must go through with it now, and the
first step took him deeper than ever into the mire.

For the coming Saturday was the day of the great cricket match, Sixth
versus School, from which a Dominican would as soon think of deserting
as of emigrating.

But Loman must desert if he was to keep his appointment, and he managed
the proceeding with his now characteristic untruthfulness; a practice he
would have scorned only a few months ago.  How easy the first wrong
step!  What a long weary road when one, with aching heart, attempts to
retrace the way!  And at present Loman had made no serious effort in
that direction.

On the Friday morning, greatly to the astonishment of all his
class-fellows, he appeared in his place with his arm in a sling.

"Hullo, Loman!" said Wren, the first whom he encountered, "what's the
row with you?"

"Sprained my wrist," said Loman, to whom, alas!--so easy is the downward
path when once entered on--a lie had become an easy thing to utter.

"How did you manage that?" exclaimed Callonby.  "Mind you get it right
by to-morrow, or we _shall_ be in a fix."

This little piece of flattery pleased Loman, who said, "I'm afraid I
shan't be able to play."

"What!  Who's that won't be able to play?" said Raleigh, coming up in
unwonted excitement.

"Loman; he's sprained his wrist."

"Have you shown it to Dr Splints?" said Raleigh.

"No," said Loman, beginning to feel uncomfortable.  "It's hardly bad
enough for that."

"Then it's hardly bad enough to prevent your playing," said Raleigh,
drily.

Loman did not like this.  He and Raleigh never got on well together, and
it was evident the captain was more angry than sympathetic now.

"Whatever shall we do for bowlers?" said some one.

"I'm awfully sorry," said Loman, wishing he was anywhere but where he
was; "but how am I to help?"

"Whatever induced you to sprain your wrist?" said Wren.  "You might just
as well have put it off till Monday."

"Just fancy how foolish we shall look if those young beggars beat us, as
they are almost sure to do," said Winter.

Loman was quickly losing his temper, for all this was, or seemed to be,
addressed pointedly to him.

"What's the use of talking like that?" he retorted.  "You ass, you! as
if I could help."

"Shouldn't wonder if you could help," replied Winter.

"Perhaps," suggested some one, "it was the _Dominican_ put him out of
joint.  It certainly did give him a rap over the knuckles."

"What do you mean?" exclaimed Loman, angrily, and half drawing his
supposed sprained hand out of the sling.

"Shut up, you fellows," interposed Raleigh, authoritatively.  "Baynes
will play in the eleven to-morrow instead of Loman, so there's an end of
the matter."

Loman was sorely mortified.  He had expected his defection would create
quite a sensation, and that his class-fellows would be inconsolable at
his accident.  Instead of that, he had only contrived to quarrel with
nearly all of them, alienating their sympathy; and in the end he was to
be quietly superseded by Baynes, and the match was to go on as if he had
never been heard of at Saint Dominic's.

"Never mind; I'm bound to go and see Cripps.  Besides," said he to
himself, "they'll miss me to-morrow, whatever they say to-day."

Next day, just when the great match was beginning, and the entire school
was hanging breathless on the issue of every ball, Loman quietly slipped
out of Saint Dominic's, and walked rapidly and nervously down to the
Cockchafer in Maltby.

"What _shall_ I say to Cripps?" was the wild question he kept asking
himself as he went along; and the answer had not come by the time he
found himself standing within that worthy's respectable premises.

Mr Cripps was in his usual good humour.

"Why, it's Mr Loman! so it is!" he exclaimed, in a rapture.  "Now who
_would_ have thought of seeing _you_ here?"

Loman was perplexed.

"Why, you told me to come this afternoon," said he.

"Did I?  Ah, I dare say!  Never mind.  Very kind of a young gentleman
like you to come and see the likes of me.  What'll you take?"

Loman did not know what to make of this at all.

"I came to see you about that--that horse you told me to bet against,"
he said.

"I remember.  What's his name?  Sir Patrick, wasn't it?  My friend told
me that he'd had the best of that.  What was it?  Ten bob?"

This affected ignorance of the whole matter in hand was utterly
bewildering to Loman, who had fully expected that, instead of having to
explain himself, he would have the matter pretty plainly explained to
him by his sportive acquaintance.

"No, ten pounds.  That was what I was to pay if the horse won; and,
Cripps, I can't pay it, or the twenty pounds either, to you."

Cripps whistled.

"That's a go and no mistake!" he said.  "Afraid it won't do, mister."

"You told me Sir Patrick was sure not to win," said Loman.

"Ah, there was several of us took in over that there horse," coolly said
Mr Cripps.  "I lost a shilling myself over him.  Nice to be you, flush
of cash, and able to pay straight down."

"I can't pay," said Loman.

"Ah, but the governor can, I'll wager," insinuated Cripps.

"He would never do it!  It's no use asking him," said Loman.

Cripps whistled again.

"That's awkward.  And my friend wants his money, too, and so do I."

"I really can't pay," said Loman.  "I say, Cripps, let us off that
twenty pounds.  I really didn't mean about that rod."

Mr Cripps fired up in righteous indignation.

"Ah, I dare say, mister.  You'll come and snivel now, will you?  But you
were ready enough to cheat a honest man when you saw a chance.  No, I'll
have my twenty or else there'll be a rumpus.  Make no mistake of that!"

The bare idea of a "rumpus" cowed Loman at once.  Anything but that.

"Come, now," said Cripps, encouragingly, "I'll wager you can raise the
wind somewheres."

"I wish I knew how.  I see no chance whatever, unless--" and here a
brilliant idea suddenly struck him--"unless I get the Nightingale.  Of
course; I say, Cripps, will you wait till September?"

"What!  Three months!  And how do you suppose I'm to find bread to eat
till then?" exclaimed Mr Cripps.

"Oh, do!" said Loman.  "I'm certain to be able to pay then.  I forgot
all about the Nightingale."

"The Nightingale?  It must be an uncommon spicy bird to fetch in thirty
pound!"

"It's not a bird," said Loman, laughing; "it's a scholarship."

"A what?"

"A scholarship.  I'm in for an exam, you know, and whoever's first gets
fifty-pounds a year for three years."

"But suppose you ain't first? what then?"

"Oh, but I'm _sure_ to be.  I've only got Fifth Form fellows against me,
and I'm certain to beat them!"

"Well," said Mr Cripps, "I don't so much care about your nightingales
and cock-sparrows and scholarships, and all them traps, but I'd like to
oblige you."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Loman, delighted, and feeling already as if the
debt was paid.  "And you'll get your friend to wait too, won't you?"

"Can't do that.  I shall have to square up with him and look to you for
the lot, and most likely drop into the workhouse for my pains."

"Oh, no.  You can be quite certain of getting the money."

"Well, blessed if I ain't a easy-going cove," said Mr Cripps, with a
grin.  "It ain't every one as 'ud wait three months on your poll-parrot
scholarships, or whatever you call 'em.  Come, business is business.
Give us your promise on a piece of paper--if you must impose upon me."
Loman, only too delighted, wrote at Mr Cripps's dictation a promise to
pay the thirty pounds, together with five pounds interest, in September,
and quitted the Cockchafer with as light a heart as if he had actually
paid off every penny of the debt.

"Of course I'm safe to get it!  Why ever didn't I think of that before?
Won't I just work the rest of the term!  Nothing like having an object
when you're grinding."

With this philosophical reflection he re-entered Saint Dominic's, and
unobserved rejoined the spectators in the cricket-field, just in time to
witness a very exciting finish to a fiercely contested encounter.



