CHAPTER XV. THE RIVAL EYRIE


EBBO trusted that his kinsman of Wildschloss was safe gone with the
Court, and his temper smoothed and his spirits rose in proportion while
preparations for a return to Adlerstein were being completed—preparations
by which the burgher lady might hope to render the castle far more
habitable, not to say baronial, than it had ever been.

The lady herself felt thankful that her stay at Ulm had turned out well
beyond all anticipations in the excellent understanding between her uncle
and her sons, and still more in Ebbo’s full submission and personal
loyalty towards the imperial family.  The die was cast, and the first
step had been taken towards rendering the Adlerstein family the peaceful,
honourable nobles she had always longed to see them.

She was one afternoon assisting her aunt in some of the duties of her
wirthschaft, when Master Gottfried entered the apartment with an air of
such extreme complacency that both turned round amazed; the one
exclaiming, “Surely funds have come in for finishing the spire!” the
other, “Have they appointed thee Provost for next year, house-father?”

“Neither the one nor the other,” was the reply.  “But heard you not the
horse’s feet?  Here has the Lord of Adlerstein Wildschloss been with me
in full state, to make formal proposals for the hand of our child,
Christina.”

“For Christina!” cried Hausfrau Johanna with delight; “truly that is
well.  Truly our maiden has done honour to her breeding.  A second
nobleman demanding her—and one who should be able richly to endow her!”

“And who will do so,” said Master Gottfried.  “For morning gift he
promises the farms and lands of Grünau—rich both in forest and corn
glebe.  Likewise, her dower shall be upon Wildschloss—where the soil is
of the richest pasture, and there are no less than three mills, whence
the lord obtains large rights of multure.  Moreover, the Castle was added
to and furnished on his marriage with the late baroness, and might serve
a Kurfürst; and though the jewels of Freiherrinn Valeska must be
inherited by her daughter, yet there are many of higher price which have
descended from his own ancestresses, and which will all be hers.”

“And what a wedding we will have!” exclaimed Johanna; “it shall be truly
baronial.  I will take my hood and go at once to neighbour Sophie
Lemsberg, who was wife to the Markgraf’s Under Keller-Meister.  She will
tell me point device the ceremonies befitting the espousals of a baron’s
widow.”

Poor Christina had sat all this time with drooping head and clasped
hands, a tear stealing down as the formal terms of the treaty sent her
spirit back to the urgent, pleading, imperious voice that had said, “Now,
little one, thou wilt not shut me out;” and as she glanced at the ring
that had lain on that broad palm, she felt as if her sixteen cheerful
years had been an injury to her husband in his nameless bloody grave.
But protection was so needful in those rude ages, and second marriages so
frequent, that reluctance was counted as weakness.  She knew her uncle
and aunt would never believe that aught but compulsion had bound her to
the rude outlaw, and her habit of submission was so strong that, only
when her aunt was actually rising to go and consult her gossip, she found
breath to falter,

“Hold, dear aunt—my sons—”

“Nay, child, it is the best thing thou couldst do for them.  Wonders hast
thou wrought, yet are they too old to be without fatherly authority.  I
speak not of Friedel; the lad is gentle and pious, though spirited, but
for the baron.  The very eye and temper of my poor brother Hugh—thy
father, Stine—are alive again in him.  Yea, I love the lad the better for
it, while I fear.  He minds me precisely of Hugh ere he was ’prenticed to
the weapon-smith, and all became bitterness.”

“Ah, truly,” said Christina, raising her eyes “all would become
bitterness with my Ebbo were I to give a father’s power to one whom he
would not love.”

“Then were he sullen and unruly, indeed!” said the old burgomaster with
displeasure; “none have shown him more kindness, none could better aid
him in court and empire.  The lad has never had restraint enough.  I
blame thee not, child, but he needs it sorely, by thine own showing.”

“Alas, uncle! mine be the blame, but it is over late.  My boy will rule
himself for the love of God and of his mother, but he will brook no hand
over him—least of all now he is a knight and thinks himself a man.
Uncle, I should be deprived of both my sons, for Friedel’s very soul is
bound up with his brother’s.  I pray thee enjoin not this thing on me,”
she implored.

“Child!” exclaimed Master Gottfried, “thou thinkst not that such a
contract as this can be declined for the sake of a wayward Junker!”

“Stay, house-father, the little one will doubtless hear reason and
submit,” put in the aunt.  “Her sons were goodly and delightsome to her
in their upgrowth, but they are well-nigh men.  They will be away to
court and camp, to love and marriage; and how will it be with her then,
young and fair as she still is?  Well will it be for her to have a
stately lord of her own, and a new home of love and honour springing
round her.”

“True,” continued Sorel; “and though she be too pious and wise to reck
greatly of such trifles, yet it may please her dreamy brain to hear that
Sir Kasimir loves her even like a paladin, and the love of a tried man of
six-and-forty is better worth than a mere kindling of youthful fancy.”

“Mine Eberhard loved me!” murmured Christina, almost to herself, but her
aunt caught the word.

“And what was such love worth?  To force thee into a stolen match, and
leave thee alone and unowned to the consequences!”

“Peace!” exclaimed Christina, with crimson cheek and uplifted head.
“Peace!  My own dear lord loved me with true and generous love!  None but
myself knows how much.  Not a word will I hear against that tender
heart.”

“Yes, peace,” returned Gottfried in a conciliatory tone,—“peace to the
brave Sir Eberhard.  Thine aunt meant no ill of him.  He truly would
rejoice that the wisdom of his choice should receive such testimony, and
that his sons should be thus well handled.  Nay, little as I heed such
toys, it will doubtless please the lads that the baron will obtain of the
Emperor letters of nobility for this house, which verily sprang of a good
Walloon family, and so their shield will have no blank.  The Romish king
promises to give thee rank with any baroness, and hath fully owned what a
pearl thou art, mine own sweet dove!  Nay, Sir Kasimir is coming
to-morrow in the trust to make the first betrothal with Graf von Kaulwitz
as a witness, and I thought of asking the Provost on the other hand.”

“To-morrow!” exclaimed Johanna; “and how is she to be meetly clad?  Look
at this widow-garb; and how is time to be found for procuring other
raiment?  House-father, a substantial man like you should better
understand!  The meal too!  I must to gossip Sophie!”

“Verily, dear mother and father,” said Christina, who had rallied a
little, “have patience with me.  I may not lightly or suddenly betroth
myself; I know not that I can do so at all, assuredly not unless my sons
were heartily willing.  Have I your leave to retire?”

“Granted, my child, for meditation will show thee that this is too fair a
lot for any but thee.  Much had I longed to see thee wedded ere thy sons
outgrew thy care, but I shunned proposing even one of our worthy
guildmasters, lest my young Freiherr should take offence; but this
knight, of his own blood, true and wise as a burgher, and faithful and
God-fearing withal, is a better match than I durst hope, and is no doubt
a special reward from thy patron saint.”

“Let me entreat one favour more,” implored Christina.  “Speak of this to
no one ere I have seen my sons.”

She made her way to her own chamber, there to weep and flutter.  Marriage
was a matter of such high contract between families that the parties
themselves had usually no voice in the matter, and only the widowed had
any chance of a personal choice; nor was this always accorded in the case
of females, who remained at the disposal of their relatives.  Good
substantial wedded affection was not lacking, but romantic love was
thought an unnecessary preliminary, and found a vent in extravagant
adoration, not always in reputable quarters.  Obedience first to the
father, then to the husband, was the first requisite; love might shift
for itself; and the fair widow of Adlerstein, telling her beads in sheer
perplexity, knew not whether her strong repugnance to this marriage and
warm sympathy with her son Ebbo were not an act of rebellion.  Yet each
moment did her husband rise before her mind more vividly, with his rugged
looks, his warm, tender heart, his dawnings of comprehension, his
generous forbearance and reverential love—the love of her youth—to be
equalled by no other.  The accomplished courtier and polished man of the
world might be his superior, but she loathed the superiority, since it
was to her husband.  Might not his one chosen dove keep heart-whole for
him to the last?  She recollected that coarsest, cruellest reproach of
all that her mother-in-law had been wont to fling at her,—that she, the
recent widow, the new-made mother of Eberhard’s babes, in her grief, her
terror, and her weakness had sought to captivate this suitor by her
blandishments.  The taunt seemed justified, and her cheeks burned with
absolute shame “My husband! my loving Eberhard! left with none but me to
love thee, unknown to thine own sons!  I cannot, I will not give my heart
away from thee!  Thy little bride shall be faithful to thee, whatever
betide.  When we meet beyond the grave I will have been thine only, nor
have set any before thy sons.  Heaven forgive me if I be undutiful to my
uncle; but thou must be preferred before even him!  Hark!” and she
started as if at Eberhard’s foot-step; then smiled, recollecting that
Ebbo had his father’s tread.  But her husband had been too much in awe of
her to enter with that hasty agitated step and exclamation, “Mother,
mother, what insolence is this!”

“Hush, Ebbo!  I prayed mine uncle to let me speak to thee.”

“It is true, then,” said Ebbo, dashing his cap on the ground; “I had
soundly beaten that grinning ’prentice for telling Heinz.”

“Truly the house rings with the rumour, mother,” said Friedel, “but we
had not believed it.”

“I believed Wildschloss assured enough for aught,” said Ebbo, “but I
thought he knew where to begin.  Does he not know who is head of the
house of Adlerstein, since he must tamper with a mechanical craftsman,
cap in hand to any sprig of nobility!  I would have soon silenced his
overtures!”

“Is it in sooth as we heard?” asked Friedel, blushing to the ears, for
the boy was shy as a maiden.  “Mother, we know what you would say,” he
added, throwing himself on his knees beside her, his arm round her waist,
his cheek on her lap, and his eyes raised to hers.

She bent down to kiss him.  “Thou knewst it, Friedel, and now must thou
aid me to remain thy father’s true widow, and to keep Ebbo from being
violent.”

Ebbo checked his hasty march to put his hand on her chair and kiss her
brow.  “Motherling, I will restrain myself, so you will give me your word
not to desert us.”

“Nay, Ebbo,” said Friedel, “the motherling is too true and loving for us
to bind her.”

“Children,” she answered, “hear me patiently.  I have been communing with
myself, and deeply do I feel that none other can I love save him who is
to you a mere name, but to me a living presence.  Nor would I put any
between you and me.  Fear me not, Ebbo.  I think the mothers and sons of
this wider, fuller world do not prize one another as we do.  But, my son,
this is no matter for rage or ingratitude.  Remember it is no small
condescension in a noble to stoop to thy citizen mother.”

“He knew what painted puppets noble ladies are,” growled Ebbo.

“Moreover,” continued Christina, “thine uncle is highly gratified, and
cannot believe that I can refuse.  He understands not my love for thy
father, and sees many advantages for us all.  I doubt me if he believes I
have power to resist his will, and for thee, he would not count thine
opposition valid.  And the more angry and vehement thou art, the more
will he deem himself doing thee a service by overruling thee.”

“Come home, mother.  Let Heinz lead our horses to the door in the dawn,
and when we are back in free Adlerstein it will be plain who is master.”

“Such a flitting would scarce prove our wisdom,” said Christina, “to run
away with thy mother like a lover in a ballad.  Nay, let me first deal
gently with thine uncle, and speak myself with Sir Kasimir, so that I may
show him the vanity of his suit.  Then will we back to Adlerstein without
leaving wounds to requite kindness.”

Ebbo was wrought on to promise not to attack the burgomaster on the
subject, but he was moody and silent, and Master Gottfried let him alone,
considering his gloom as another proof of his need of fatherly authority,
and as a peace-lover forbearing to provoke his fiery spirit.

But when Sir Kasimir’s visit was imminent, and Christina had refused to
make the change in her dress by which a young widow was considered to lay
herself open to another courtship, Master Gottfried called the twins
apart.

“My young lords,” he said, “I fear me ye are vexing your gentle mother by
needless strife at what must take place.”

“Pardon me, good uncle,” said Ebbo, “I utterly decline the honour of Sir
Kasimir’s suit to my mother.”

Master Gottfried smiled.  “Sons are not wont to be the judges in such
cases, Sir Eberhard.”

“Perhaps not,” he answered; “but my mother’s will is to the nayward, nor
shall she be coerced.”

“It is merely because of you and your pride,” said Master Gottfried.

“I think not so,” rejoined the calmer Friedel; “my mother’s love for my
father is still fresh.”

“Young knights,” said Master Gottfried, “it would scarce become me to
say, nor you to hear, how much matter of fancy such love must have been
towards one whom she knew but for a few short months, though her pure
sweet dreams, through these long years, have moulded him into a hero.
Boys, I verily believe ye love her truly.  Would it be well for her still
to mourn and cherish a dream while yet in her fresh age, capable of new
happiness, fuller than she has ever enjoyed?”

“She is happy with us,” rejoined Ebbo.

“And ye are good lads and loving sons, though less duteous in manner than
I could wish.  But look you, you may not ever be with her, and when ye
are absent in camp or court, or contracting a wedlock of your own, would
you leave her to her lonesome life in your solitary castle?”

Friedel’s unselfishness might have been startled, but Ebbo boldly
answered, “All mine is hers.  No joy to me but shall be a joy to her.  We
can make her happier than could any stranger.  Is it not so, Friedel?”

“It is,” said Friedel, thoughtfully.

“Ah, rash bloods, promising beyond what ye can keep.  Nature will be too
strong for you.  Love your mother as ye may, what will she be to you when
a bride comes in your way?  Fling not away in wrath, Sir Baron; it was so
with your parents both before you; and what said the law of the good God
at the first marriage?  How can you withstand the nature He has given?”

“Belike I may wed,” said Ebbo, bluntly; “but if it be not for my mother’s
happiness, call me man-sworn knight.”

“Not so,” good-humouredly answered Gottfried, “but boy-sworn paladin, who
talks of he knows not what.  Speak knightly truth, Sir Baron, and own
that this opposition is in verity from distaste to a stepfather’s rule.”

“I own that I will not brook such rule,” said Ebbo; “nor do I know what
we have done to deserve that it should be thrust on us.  You have never
blamed Friedel, at least; and verily, uncle, my mother’s eye will lead me
where a stranger’s hand shall never drive me.  Did I even think she had
for this man a quarter of the love she bears to my dead father, I would
strive for endurance; but in good sooth we found her in tears, praying us
to guard her from him.  I may be a boy, but I am man enough to prevent
her from being coerced.”

“Was this so, Friedel?” asked Master Gottfried, moved more than by all
that had gone before.  “Ach, I thought ye all wiser.  And spake she not
of Sir Kasimir’s offers?—Interest with the Romish king?—Yea, and a grant
of nobility and arms to this house, so as to fill the blank in your
scutcheon?”

“My father never asked if she were noble,” said Ebbo.  “Nor will I barter
her for a cantle of a shield.”

“There spake a manly spirit,” said his uncle, delighted.  “Her worth hath
taught thee how little to prize these gewgaws!  Yet, if you look to
mingling with your own proud kind, ye may fall among greater slights than
ye can brook.  It may matter less to you, Sir Baron, but Friedel here,
ay, and your sons, will be ineligible to the choicest orders of
knighthood, and the canonries and chapters that are honourable
endowments.”

Friedel looked as if he could bear it, and Eberhard said, “The order of
the Dove of Adlerstein is enough for us.”

“Headstrong all, headstrong all,” sighed Master Gottfried.  “One romantic
marriage has turned all your heads.”

The Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss, unprepared for the opposition that
awaited him, was riding down the street equipped point device, and with a
goodly train of followers, in brilliant suits.  Private wooing did not
enter into the honest ideas of the burghers, and the suitor was ushered
into the full family assembly, where Christina rose and came forward a
few steps to meet him, curtseying as low as he bowed, as he said, “Lady,
I have preferred my suit to you through your honour-worthy uncle, who is
good enough to stand my friend.”

“You are over good, sir.  I feel the honour, but a second wedlock may not
be mine.”

“Now,” murmured Ebbo to his brother, as the knight and lady seated
themselves in full view, “now will the smooth-tongued fellow talk her out
of her senses.  Alack! that gipsy prophecy!”

Wildschloss did not talk like a young wooer; such days were over for
both; but he spoke as a grave and honourable man, deeply penetrated with
true esteem and affection.  He said that at their first meeting he had
been struck with her sweetness and discretion, and would soon after have
endeavoured to release her from her durance, but that he was bound by the
contract already made with the Trautbachs, who were dangerous neighbours
to Wildschloss.  He had delayed his distasteful marriage as long as
possible, and it had caused him nothing but trouble and strife; his
children would not live, and Thekla, the only survivor, was, as his sole
heiress, a mark for the cupidity of her uncle, the Count of Trautbach,
and his almost savage son Lassla; while the right to the Wildschloss
barony would become so doubtful between her and Ebbo, as heir of the male
line, that strife and bloodshed would be well-nigh inevitable.  These
causes made it almost imperative that he should re-marry, and his own
strong preference and regard for little Thekla directed his wishes
towards the Freiherrinn von Adlerstein.  He backed his suit with courtly
compliments, as well as with representations of his child’s need of a
mother’s training, and the twins’ equal want of fatherly guidance,
dilating on the benefits he could confer on them.

Christina felt his kindness, and had full trust in his intentions.  “No”
was a difficult syllable to her, but she had that within her which could
not accept him; and she firmly told him that she was too much bound to
both her Eberhards.  But there was no daunting him, nor preventing her
uncle and aunt from encouraging him.  He professed that he would wait,
and give her time to consider; and though she reiterated that
consideration would not change her mind, Master Gottfried came forward to
thank him, and express his confidence of bringing her to reason.

“While I, sir,” said Ebbo, with flashing eyes, and low but resentful
voice, “beg to decline the honour in the name of the elder house of
Adlerstein.”

He held himself upright as a dart, but was infinitely annoyed by the
little mocking bow and smile that he received in return, as Sir Kasimir,
with his long mantle, swept out of the apartment, attended by Master
Gottfried.

“Burgomaster Sorel,” said the boy, standing in the middle of the floor as
his uncle returned, “let me hear whether I am a person of any
consideration in this family or not?”

“Nephew baron,” quietly replied Master Gottfried, “it is not the use of
us Germans to be dictated to by youths not yet arrived at years of
discretion.”

“Then, mother,” said Ebbo, “we leave this place to-morrow morn.”  And at
her nod of assent the house-father looked deeply grieved, the
house-mother began to clamour about ingratitude.  “Not so,” answered
Ebbo, fiercely.  “We quit the house as poor as we came, in homespun and
with the old mare.”

“Peace, Ebbo!” said his mother, rising; “peace, I entreat, house-mother!
pardon, uncle, I pray thee.  O, why will not all who love me let me
follow that which I believe to be best!”

“Child,” said her uncle, “I cannot see thee domineered over by a youth
whose whole conduct shows his need of restraint.”

“Nor am I,” said Christina.  “It is I who am utterly averse to this
offer.  My sons and I are one in that; and, uncle, if I pray of you to
consent to let us return to our castle, it is that I would not see the
visit that has made us so happy stained with strife and dissension!
Sure, sure, you cannot be angered with my son for his love for me.”

“For the self-seeking of his love,” said Master Gottfried.  “It is to
gratify his own pride that he first would prevent thee from being
enriched and ennobled, and now would bear thee away to the scant—Nay,
Freiherr, I will not seem to insult you, but resentment would make you
cruel to your mother.”

“Not cruel!” said Friedel, hastily.  “My mother is willing.  And verily,
good uncle, methinks that we all were best at home.  We have benefited
much and greatly by our stay; we have learnt to love and reverence you;
but we are wild mountaineers at the best; and, while our hearts are
fretted by the fear of losing our sweet mother, we can scarce be as
patient or submissive as if we had been bred up by a stern father.  We
have ever judged and acted for ourselves, and it is hard to us not to do
so still, when our minds are chafed.”

“Friedel,” said Ebbo, sternly, “I will have no pardon asked for
maintaining my mother’s cause.  Do not thou learn to be smooth-tongued.”

“O thou wrong-headed boy!” half groaned Master Gottfried.  “Why did not
all this fall out ten years sooner, when thou wouldst have been amenable?
Yet, after all, I do not know that any noble training has produced a more
high-minded loving youth,” he added, half relenting as he looked at the
gallant, earnest face, full of defiance indeed, but with a certain
wistful appealing glance at “the motherling,” softening the liquid
lustrous dark eye.  “Get thee gone, boy, I would not quarrel with you;
and it may be, as Friedel says, that we are best out of one another’s
way.  You are used to lord it, and I can scarce make excuses for you.”

“Then,” said Ebbo, scarce appeased, “I take home my mother, and you, sir,
cease to favour Kasimir’s suit.”

“No, Sir Baron.  I cease not to think that nothing would be so much for
your good.  It is because I believe that a return to your own old castle
will best convince you all that I will not vex your mother by further
opposing your departure.  When you perceive your error may it only not be
too late!  Such a protector is not to be found every day.”

“My mother shall never need any protector save myself,” said Ebbo; “but,
sir, she loves you, and owes all to you.  Therefore I will not be at
strife with you, and there is my hand.”

He said it as if he had been the Emperor reconciling himself to all the
Hanse towns in one.  Master Gottfried could scarce refrain from shrugging
his shoulders, and Hausfrau Johanna was exceedingly angry with the
petulant pride and insolence of the young noble; but, in effect, all were
too much relieved to avoid an absolute quarrel with the fiery lad to take
exception at minor matters.  The old burgher was forbearing; Christina,
who knew how much her son must have swallowed to bring him to this
concession for love of her, thought him a hero worthy of all sacrifices;
and peace-making Friedel, by his aunt’s side, soon softened even her, by
some of the persuasive arguments that old dames love from gracious,
graceful, great-nephews.

And when, by and by, Master Gottfried went out to call on Sir Kasimir,
and explain how he had thought it best to yield to the hot-tempered lad,
and let the family learn how to be thankful for the goods they had
rejected, he found affairs in a state that made him doubly anxious that
the young barons should be safe on their mountain without knowing of
them.  The Trautbach family had heard of Wildschloss’s designs, and they
had set abroad such injurious reports respecting the Lady of Adlerstein,
that Sir Kasimir was in the act of inditing a cartel to be sent by Count
Kaulwitz, to demand an explanation—not merely as the lady’s suitor, but
as the only Adlerstein of full age.  Now, if Ebbo had heard of the
rumour, he would certainly have given the lie direct, and taken the whole
defence on himself; and it may be feared that, just as his cause might
have been, Master Gottfried’s faith did not stretch to believing that it
would make his sixteen-year-old arm equal to the brutal might of Lassla
of Trautbach.  So he heartily thanked the Baron of Wildschloss, agreed
with him that the young knights were not as yet equal to the maintenance
of the cause, and went home again to watch carefully that no report
reached either of his nephews.  Nor did he breathe freely till he had
seen the little party ride safe off in the early morning, in much more
lordly guise than when they had entered the city.

As to Wildschloss and his nephew of Trautbach, in spite of their
relationship they had a sharp combat on the borders of their own estates,
in which both were severely wounded; but Sir Kasimir, with the
misericorde in his grasp, forced Lassla to retract whatever he had said
in dispraise of the Lady of Adlerstein.  Wily old Gottfried took care
that the tidings should be sent in a form that might at once move
Christina with pity and gratitude towards her champion, and convince her
sons that the adversary was too much hurt for them to attempt a fresh
challenge.




