CHAPTER III. "THE JOLLY HERRING"

"Velut unda supervenit undam."--VIRGIL.

The Anti-muffs request the honor of Williams' company to a spread they
are going to have to-morrow evening at half-past four, in their
smoking-room--

A note to this effect was put into Eric's hands by Wildney after
prayers. He read it when he got into his study, and hardly knew whether
to be pleased or disgusted at it.

He tossed it to Duncan, and said, "What shall I do?"

Duncan turned up his nose, and chucked the note into the fire.

"I'd give them that answer, and no other."

"Why?"

"Because, Eric," said Duncan, with more seriousness than was usual with
him, "I can't help thinking things have gone too far lately."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, I'm no saint myself, Heaven knows; but I do think that the
fellows are worse now than I have ever known them--far worse. Your
friend Brigson reigns supreme out of the studies; he has laid down a law
that _no work_ is to be done down stairs ever under any pretence, and
it's only by getting into one of the studies that good little chaps
like Wright can get on at all. Even in the class-rooms there's so much
row and confusion that the mere thought of work is ridiculous."

"Well, there's no great harm in a little noise, if that's all."

"But it isn't all. The talk of nearly the whole school is getting most
blackguardly; shamelessly so. Only yesterday Wildney was chatting with
Vernon up here (you were out, or Vernon would not have been here) while
I was reading; they didn't seem to mind me, and I'm sure you'd have been
vexed to the heart if you'd heard how they talked to each other. At last
I couldn't stand it any longer, and bouncing up, I boxed both their ears
smartly, and kicked them down stairs."

As Eric said nothing, Duncan continued, "And I wish it ended in talk,
but----"

"But I believe you're turning Owenite. Why, bless me, we're only
schoolboys; it'll be lots of time to turn saint some other day."

Eric was talking at random, and in the spirit of opposition. "You don't
want to make the whole school such a muffish set as the rosebuds,
do you?"

There was something of assumed bravado in Eric's whole manner which
jarred on Duncan exceedingly. "Do as you like," he said, curtly, and
went into another study.

Immediately after came a rap at the door, and in walked Wildney, as he
often did after the rest were gone to bed, merely slipping his trousers
over his nightshirt, and running up to the studies.

"Well, you'll come to the Anti-muffs, won't you?" he said.

"To that pestilential place again?--not I."

Wildney looked offended. "Not after we've all asked you? The fellows
won't half like your refusing."

He had touched Eric's weak point.

"Do come," he said, looking up in Eric's face.

"Confound it all," answered Eric, hastily. "Yes, I've no friends, I'll
come, Charlie. Anything to please you, boy."

"That's a brick. Then I shall cut down and tell the fellows. They'll be
no end glad. No friends! why all the school like you." And he scampered
off, leaving Eric ill at ease.

Duncan didn't re-enter the study that evening.

The next day, about half-past four, Eric found himself on the way to
Ellan. As he was starting, Bull caught him up, and said--

"Are you going to the Anti-muffs?"

"Yes; why? are you going too?"

"Yes; do you mind our going together?"

"Not at all."

In fact, Eric was very glad of some one--no matter who--to keep him in
countenance, for he felt considerably more than half ashamed
of himself.

They went to "The Jolly Herring," as the pot-house was called, and
passed through the dingy beery tap-room into the back parlor, to which
Eric had already been introduced by Wildney. About a dozen boys were
assembled, and there was a great clapping on the table as the two
new-comers entered. A long table was laid down the room, which was
regularly spread for dinner.

"Now then, Billy; make haste with the goose," called Brigson. "I vote,
boys, that Eric Williams takes the chair."

"Hear! hear!" said half a dozen; and Eric, rather against his will,
found himself ensconced at the end of the table, with Brigson and Bull
on either hand. The villainous-low-foreheaded man, whom they called
Billy, soon brought in a tough goose at one end of the table, and some
fowls at the other; and they fell to, doing ample justice to the [Greek:
daiz heisae] while Billy waited on them. There was immense uproar during
the dinner, every one eating as fast, and talking as loud, as he could.

The birds soon vanished, and were succeeded by long rolly-polly
puddings, which the boys called Goliahs; and they, too, rapidly
disappeared. Meanwhile beer was circling only too plentifully.

"Now for the dessert, Billy," called several voices; and that worthy
proceeded to put on the table some figs, cakes, oranges, and four black
bottles of wine. There was a general grab for these dainties, and one
boy shouted, "I say, I've had no wine."

"Well, it's all gone. We must get some brandy--it's cheaper," said
Brigson; and accordingly some brandy was brought in, which the boys
diluted with hot water, and soon despatched.

"Here! before you're all done swilling," said Brigson, "I've got a
health; 'Confound muffs and masters, and success to the anti's.'"

"And their chairman,' suggested Wildney.

"And their chairman, the best fellow in the school," added Brigson.

The health was drunk with due clamor, and Eric got up to thank them.

"I'm not going to spout," he said; "but boys must be boys, and there's
no harm in a bit of fun. I for one have enjoyed it, and am much obliged
to you for asking me; and now I call for a song."

"Wildney! Wildney's song," called several.

Wildney had a good voice, and struck up, without the least bashfulness--

     "Come, landlord, fill the flowing bowl,
       Until it does run overt
     Come, landlord, fill," &c

"Now," he said, "join in the chorus!" The boys, all more or less
excited, joined in heartily and uproariously--

     "For to-night we'll merry merry be!
     For to-night we'll merry merry be!
     For to-night we'll merry merry be!
       To-morrow we'll be sober!"

While Wildney sang, Eric had time to think. As he glanced round the
room, at the flushed faces of the boys, some of whom he could not
recognise in the dusky atmosphere, a qualm of disgust and shame passed
over him. Several of them were smoking, and, with Bull and Brigson
heading the line on each, side of the table, he could not help observing
what a bad set they looked. The remembrance of Russell came back to him.
Oh, if Edwin could have known that he was in such company at such a
place! And by the door stood Billy, watching them all like an evil
spirit, with a leer of saturnine malice on his evil face.

But the bright little Wildney, unconscious of Eric's bitter thoughts,
sang on with overflowing mirth. As Eric looked at him, shining out like
a sunbeam among the rest, he felt something like blood-guiltiness on his
soul, when, he felt that he was sanctioning the young boy's presence in
that degraded assemblage.

Wildney meanwhile was just beginning the next verse, when he was
interrupted by a general cry of "cavé, cavé." In an instant the room was
in confusion; some one dashed the candles upon the floor, the table was
overturned with a mighty crash, and plates, glasses, and bottles rushed
on to the ground in shivers. Nearly every one bolted for the door, which
led through the passage into the street; and in their headlong flight
and selfishness, they stumbled over each other, and prevented all
egress, several being knocked down and bruised in the crush. Others made
for the tap-room; but, as they opened the door leading into it, there
stood Mr. Ready and Mr. Gordon! and as it was impossible to pass without
being seen, they made no further attempt at escape. All this was the
work of a minute. Entering the back parlor, the two masters quickly took
down the names of full half the boys who, in the suddenness of the
surprise, had been unable to make their exit.

And Eric?

The instant that the candles were knocked over, he felt Wildney seize
his hand, and whisper, "This way all serene;" following, he groped his
way in the dark to the end of the room, where Wildney, shoving aside a
green baize curtain, noiselessly opened a door, which at once let them
into a little garden. There they both crouched down, under a lilac tree
beside the house, and listened intently.

There was no need for this precaution; their door remained unsuspected,
and in five minutes the coast was clear. Creeping into the house again,
they whistled, and Billy coming in, told them that the masters had gone,
and all was safe.

"Glad ye're not twigged, gen'lmen," he said; "but there'll be a pretty
sight of damage for all this glass and plates."

"Shut up with your glass and plates," said Wildney. "Here, Eric, we must
cut for it again."

It was the dusk of a winter evening when they got out from the close
room into the open air, and they had to consider which way they would
choose to avoid discovery. They happened to choose the wrong, but
escaped by dint of hard running, and Wildney's old short cut. As they
ran they passed several boys (who having been caught, were walking home
leisurely), and managed to get back undiscovered, when they both
answered their names quite innocently at the roll-call, immediately
after lock up.

"What lucky dogs you are to get off," said many boys to them.

"Yes, it's precious lucky for me," said Wildney. "If I'd been caught at
this kind of thing a second time, I should have got something worse than
a swishing."

"Well, it's all through you I escaped," said Eric, "you knowing little
scamp."

"I'm glad of it, Eric," said Wildney in his fascinating way, "since it
is all through me you went. It's rather too hazardous though; we must
manage better another time."

During tea-time Eric was silent, as he felt pretty sure that none of the
sixth form or other study boys would particularly sympathise with his
late associates. Since the previous evening he had been cool with
Duncan, and the rest had long rather despised him as a boy who'd do
anything to be popular; so he sat there silent, looking as disdainful as
he could, and not touching the tea, for which he felt disinclined after
the recent potations. But the contemptuous exterior hid a self-reproving
heart, and he felt how far more noble Owen and Montagu were than he. How
gladly would he have changed places with them! how much he would have
given to recover some of their forfeited esteem!

The master on duty was Mr. Rose, and after tea he left the room for a
few minutes while the tables were cleared for "preparation," and the
boys were getting out their books and exercises. All the study and
class-room boys were expected to go away during this interval; but Eric,
not noticing Mr. Rose's entrance, sat gossipping with Wildney about the
dinner and its possible consequences to the school.

He was sitting on the desk carelessly, with one leg over the other, and
bending down towards Wildney. He had just told him that he looked like a
regular little sunbeam in the smoking-room of the Jolly Herring, and
Wildney was pretending to be immensely offended by the simile.

"Hush! no more talking," said Mr. Rose, who did everything very gently
and quietly. Eric heard him, but he was inclined to linger, and had
always received such mild treatment from Mr. Rose, that he didn't think
he would take much notice of the delay. For the moment he did not, so
Wildney began to chatter again.

"All study boys to leave the room," said Mr. Rose.

Eric just glanced round and moved slightly; he might have gone away,
but that he caught a satirical look in Wildney's eye, and besides wanted
to show off a little indifference to his old master, with whom he had
had no intercourse since their last-mentioned conversation.

"Williams, go away instantly; what do you mean by staying after I have
dismissed you?" said Mr. Rose sternly.

Every one knew what a favorite Eric had once been, so this speech
created a slight titter. The boy heard it just as he was going out of
the room, and it annoyed him, and called to arms all his proud and
dogged obstinacy. Pretending to have forgotten something, he walked
conceitedly back to Wildney, and whispered to him, "I shan't go if he
chooses to speak like that."

A red flush passed over Mr. Rose's cheek; he took two strides to Eric,
and laid the cane sharply once across his back.

Eric was not quite himself, or he would not have acted as he had done.
His potations, though not deep, had, with the exciting events of the
evening, made his head giddy, and the stroke of the cane, which he had
not felt now for two years, roused him to madness. He bounded up, sprang
towards Mr. Rose, and almost before he knew what he was about, had
wrenched the cane out of his hands, twisted it violently in the middle
until it broke, and flung one of the pieces furiously into the fire.

For one instant, boy and master--Eric Williams and Mr. Rose--stood
facing each other amid breathless silence, the boy panting and
passionate, with his brain swimming, and his heart on fire; the master
pale, grieved, amazed beyond measure, but perfectly self-collected.

"After that exhibition," said Mr. Rose, with cold and quiet dignity,
"you had better leave the room."

"Yes, I had," answered Eric bitterly; "there's your cane." And, flinging
the other fragment at Mr. Rose's head, he strode blindly out of the
room, sweeping books from the table, and overturning several boys in his
way. He then banged the door with all his force, and rushed up into
his study.

Duncan was there, and remarking his wild look and demeanor, asked, after
a moment's awkward silence, "Is anything the matter, Williams?"

"Williams!" echoed Eric with a scornful laugh; "yes, that's always the
way with a fellow when he's in trouble. I always know what's coming when
you begin to leave off calling me by my Christian name."

"Very well, then," said Duncan, good-humoredly, "what's the matter,
Eric?"

"Matter?" answered Brie, pacing up and down the little room with an
angry to-and-fro like a caged wild beast, and kicking everything which
came in his way. "Matter? hang you all, you are all turning against me,
because you are a set of muffs, and----"

"Take care!" said Duncan; but suddenly he caught Eric's look, and
stopped.

"And I've been breaking Rose's cane over his head, because he had the
impudence to touch, me with it, and----"

"Eric, you're not yourself to-night," said Duncan, interrupting, but
speaking in the kindest tone; and taking Eric's hand, he looked him
steadily in the face.

Their eyes met; the boy's false self once more slipped off. By a strong
effort he repressed the rising passion which the fumes of drink had
caused, and flinging him self on his chair, refused to speak again, or
even to go down stairs when the prayer-bell rang.

Seeing that in his present mood there was nothing to be done with him,
Duncan, instead of returning to the study, went after prayers into
Montagu's, and talked with him over the recent events, of which the
boys' minds were all full.

But Eric sat lonely, sulky, and miserable, in his study, doing nothing,
and when Montagu came in to visit him, felt inclined to resent
his presence.

"So!" he said, looking up at the ceiling, "another saint come to cast a
stone at me! Well! I suppose I must be resigned," he continued, dropping
his cheek on his hand again; "only don't let the sermon be long."

But Montagu took no notice of his sardonic harshness, and seated himself
by his side, though Eric pettishly pushed him away.

"Come, Eric," said Montagu, taking the hand which was repelling him; "I
won't be repulsed in this way. Look at me. What? won't you even look? Oh
Eric, one wouldn't have fancied this in past days, when we were so much
together with one who is dead. It's a long long time since we've eyen
alluded to him, but _I_ shall never forget those happy days."

Eric heaved a deep sigh.

"I'm not come to reproach you. You don't give me a friend's right to
reprove. But still, Eric, for your own sake, dear fellow, I can't help
being sorry for all this. I did hope you'd have broken with Brigson
after the thrashing I gave him, for the way in which he treated me. I
don't think you _can_ know the mischief he is doing."

The large tears began to soften the fire of Eric's eye, "Ah!" he said,
"it's all of no use; you're all giving me the cold shoulder, and I'm
going to the bad, that's the long and short of it."

"Oh, Eric! for your own sake, for your parents' sake, for the school's
sake, for all your real friends' sake, don't talk in that bitter
hopeless way. You are too noble a fellow to be made the tool or the
patron of the boys who lead, while they seem to follow you. I _do_ hope
you'll join us even yet in resisting them."

Eric had laid his head on the table, which shook with his emotion. "I
can't talk, Monty," he said, in an altered tone; "but leave me now; and
if you like, we will have a walk to-morrow."

"Most willingly, Eric." And again, warmly pressing his hand, Montagu
returned to his own study.

Soon after, there came a timid knock at Eric's door. He expected Wildney
as usual; a little before, he had been looking out for him, and hoping
he would come, but he didn't want to see him now, so he answered rather
peevishly, "Come in; but I don't want to be bothered to-night."

Not Wildney, but Vernon appeared at the door. "May I come in? not if it
bothers you, Eric," he said, gently.

"Oh, Verny, I didn't know it was you; I thought it would be Wildney. You
_never_ come now."

The little boy came in, and his pleading look seemed to say, "Whose
fault is that?"

"Come here, Verny;" and Eric drew him towards him, and put him on his
knee, while the tears trembled large and luminous in the child's eyes.

It was the first time for many a long day that the brothers had been
alone together, the first time for many a long day that any acts of
kindness had passed between them. Both seemed to remember this, and, at
the same time, to remember home, and their absent parents, and their
mother's prayers, and all the quiet half-forgotten vista of innocent
pleasures, and sacred relationships, and holy affections. And why did
they see each other so little at school? Their consciences told them
both, that either wished to conceal from the other his wickedness and
forgetfulness of God.

They wept together; and once more, as they had not done since they were
children, each brother put his arm round the other's neck, and
remorseful Eric could not help being amazed, how, in his cruel heartless
selfishness, he had let that fair child go so far astray; left him as a
prey to such boys as were his companions in the lower school.

"Eric, did you know I was caught to-night at the dinner?"

"You!" said Brie, with a start and a deep blush. "Good heavens! I didn't
notice you, and should not have dreamt of coming, if I'd known you were
there. Oh, Vernon, forgive me for setting you such, a bad example."

"Yes, I was there, and I was caught."

"Poor boy! but never mind; there are such a lot that you can't get much
done to you."

"It isn't _that_ I care for; I've been flogged before, you know.
But--may I say something?"

"Yes, Vernon, anything you like."

"Well, then,--oh, Eric! I am so, so sorry that you did that to Mr. Rose
to-night. All the fellows are praising you up, of course; but I could
have cried to see it, and I did. I wouldn't have minded if it had been
anybody but Rose."

"But why?"

"Because, Eric, he's been so good, so kind to both of us. You've often
told me about him, you know, at Fairholm, and he's done such, lots of
kind things to me. And only to-night, when he heard I was caught, he
sent for me to the library, and spoke so firmly, yet so gently, about
the wickedness of going to such low places, and about so young a boy as
I am learning to drink, and the ruin of it and--and"--His voice was
choked by sobs for a time,--"and then he knelt down and prayed for me,
so as I have never heard any one pray but mother;--and do you know,
Eric, it was strange, but I thought I _did_ hear our mother's voice
praying for me too, while he prayed, and"--He tried in vain to go on;
but Eric's conscience continued for him; "and just as he had ceased
doing this for one brother, the other brother, for whom he has often
done the same, treated him with coarseness, violence, and insolence."

"Oh, I am utterly wretched, Verny. I hate myself And to think that while
I am like this, they are yet loving and praising me at home. And, oh,
Verny, I was so sorry to hear from Duncan, how you were talking the
other day."

Vernon hid his face on Eric's shoulder; and as his brother stooped over
him, and folded him to his heart, they cried in silence, until wearied
with sorrow, the younger fell asleep; and then Eric carried him tenderly
down stairs, and laid him, still half-sleeping, upon his bed.

He laid him down, and looked at him as he slumbered. The other boys had
not been disturbed by their noiseless entrance, and he sat down on his
brother's bed to think, shading off the light of the candle with his
hand. It was rarely now that Eric's thoughts were so rich with the
memories of childhood, and sombre with the consciousness of sin, as they
were that night, while he gazed on his brother Vernon's face. He did not
know what made him look so long and earnestly; an indistinct sorrow, an
unconjectured foreboding, passed over his mind, like the shadow of a
summer cloud. Vernon was now slumbering deeply; his soft childish curls
fell off his forehead, and his head nestled in the pillow; but there was
an expression of uneasiness on his sleeping features, and the long
eyelashes were still wet with tears.

"Poor child," thought Eric; "dear little Vernon; and he is to be
flogged, perhaps birched, to-morrow."

He went off sadly to bed, and hardly once remembered, that _he_ too
would come in for certain punishment the next day.



