CHAPTER VII. THE PIGEONS

     "Et motae ad Lunam trepidabis arundinis umbram."

     Juv. X. 21.

"How awfully dull it is, Charlie," said Eric, a few weeks before Easter,
as he sat with Wildney in his study one holiday afternoon.

"Yes; too late for football, too early for cricket." And Wildney
stretched himself and yawned.

"I suppose this is what they call ennui," said Eric again, after a
pause. "What is to be done, Sunbeam?"

"You _shan't_ call me that, so there's an end of it," said Wildney,
hitting him on the arm.

"By the bye, Eric, you remind me to-morrow's my birth-day, and I've got
a parcel coming this afternoon full of grub from home. Let's go and see
if it's come."

"Capital! We will."

So Eric and Wildney started off to the coach-office, where they found
the hamper, and ordered it to be brought at once to the school, and
carried up to Eric's study.

On opening it they found it rich in dainties, among which were a pair of
fowls and a large plum-cake.

"Hurrah!" said Wildney, "you were talking of nothing to do; I vote we
have a carouse to-morrow."

"Very well; only let's have it _before_ prayers, because we were so
nearly caught last time."

"Ay, and let it be in one of the class-rooms, Eric; not up here, lest
we have another incursion of the 'Rosebuds.' I shall have to cut
preparation, but that don't matter, It's Harley's night, and old Stupid
will never twig."

"Well, whom shall we ask?" said Eric.

"Old Llewellyn for one," said Wildney. "We havn't seen him for an age,
and he's getting too lazy even for a bit of fun."

"Good; and Graham," suggested Eric. He and Wildney regarded their
possessions so much as common property, that he hadn't the least
delicacy in mentioning the boys whom he wanted to invite.

"Yes; Graham's a jolly bird; and Bull?"

"I've no objection; and Pietrie?"

"Well; and your brother Vernon?"

"No!" said Eric, emphatically. "At any rate I won't lead _him_ into
mischief any more."

"Attlay, then; and what do you say to Brooking?"

"No, again," said Eric; "he's a blackguard."

"I wonder you haven't mentioned Duncan," said Wildney.

"Duncan! why, my dear child, you might as well ask Owen, or even old
Rose, at once. Bless you, Charlie, he's a great deal too correct to
come now."

"Well; we've got six already, that's quite enough."

"Yes; but two fowls isn't enough for six hungry boys."

"No, it isn't," said Wildney. He thought a little, and then, clapping
his hands, danced about and said, "Are you game for a _regular_
lark, Eric?"

"Yes; anything to make it less dull. I declare I've very nearly been
taking to work again to fill up the time."

Eric often talked now of work in this slighting way partly as an excuse
for the low places in form to which he was gradually sinking. Everybody
knew that had he properly exerted his abilities he was capable of
beating almost any boy; so, to quiet his conscience, he professed to
ridicule diligence as an unboyish piece of muffishness, and was never
slow to sneer at the "grinders," as he contemptuously called all those
who laid themselves out to win school distinctions.

"Ha, ha!" said Wildney, "that's rather good! No, Eric, it's too late for
you to turn 'grinder' now. I might as well think of doing it myself, and
I've never been higher than five from lag in my form yet."

"Haven't you? But what's the regular lark you hinted at?"

"Why, we'll go and seize the Gordonites' _pigeons_, and make another
dish of them."

"Seize the Gordonites' pigeons! Why, when do you mean?"

"To-night."

Eric gave a long whistle. "But wouldn't it be st--t--?"

"Stealing?" said Wildney, with a loud laugh. "Pooh! '_convey_ the wise
call it.'"

But Eric still looked serious. "Why, my dear old boy," continued
Wildney, "the Gordonites'll be the first to laugh at the trick when we
tell them of it next morning, as of course we will do. There, now, don't
look grumpy. I shall cut away and arrange it with. Graham, and tell you
the whole dodge ready prepared to-night at bed-time."

After lights were put out, Wildney came up to the study according to
promise, and threw out hints about the proposed plan. He didn't tell it
plainly, because Duncan was there, but Duncan caught enough to guess
what was intended, and said, when Wildney had gone--

"Take my advice, and have nothing to do with this, Eric."

Eric had grown very touchy lately about advice, particularly from any
fellow of his own standing; and after the checks he had recently
received, a coolness had sprung up between him and nearly all the
study-boys, which made him more than ever inclined to assert his
independence, and defy and thwart them in every way.

"Keep your advice to yourself, Duncan, till it's asked for," he
answered, roughly. "You've done nothing but _advise_ lately, and I'm
rather sick of it."

"Comme vous voulez," replied Duncan, with a shrug. "Gang your own gait;
I'll have nothing more to do with trying to stop you, since you _will_
ruin yourself."

Nothing more was said in the study that evening, and when Eric went down
he didn't even bid Duncan goodnight.

"Charlie," he said, as he stole on tiptoe into Wildney's dormitory.

"Hush!" whispered Wildney, "the other fellows are asleep. Come and sit
by my bedside, and I'll tell you what we're going to do."

Eric went and sat by him, and he sat up in his bed "First of all,
_you're_ to keep awake till twelve to-night," he whispered; "old
Rowley'll have gone round by that time, and it'll be all safe. Then come
and awake me again, and I'll watch till one, Pietrie till two, and
Graham till three. Then Graham'll awake us all, and we'll dress."

"Very well. But how will you get the key of the lavatory?"

"Oh, I'll manage that," said Wildney, chuckling. "But come again and
awake me at twelve, will you?"

Eric went to his room and lay down, but he didn't take off his clothes,
for fear he should go to sleep. Dr. Rowlands came round as usual at
eleven, and then Eric closed his eyes for a few minutes, till the
head-master had disappeared. After that he lay awake thinking for an
hour, but his thoughts weren't very pleasant.

At twelve he went and awoke Wildney.

"I don't feel very sleepy. Shall I sit with you for your hour, Charlie?"

"Oh, do! I should like it of all things. But douse the glim there; we
shan't want it, and it might give the alarm."

"All right."

So Eric went and sat by his dangerous little friend, and they talked in
low voices until they heard the great school clock strike one. They then
woke Pietrie, and Eric went off to bed again.

At three Graham awoke him, and dressing hastily, he joined the others in
the lavatory.

"Now, I'm going to get the key," said Wildney, "and mean to have a
stomach-ache for the purpose."

Laughing quietly he went up to the door of Mr. Harley's bed-room, which
opened out of the lavatory, and knocked.

No answer. He knocked a little louder. Still no answer. Louder still.

"Bother the fellow," said Wildney; "he sleeps like a grampus. Won't one
of you try to wake him?"

"No," said Graham; "'taint dignified for fifth-form boys to have
stomach-aches."

"Well, I must try again." But it seemed no use knocking, and Wildney at
last, in a fit of impatience, thumped a regular tattoo on the
bed-room door.

"Who's there?" said the startled voice of Mr. Harley.

"Only me, sir!" answered Wildney, in a mild and innocent way.

"What do you want?"

"Please, sir, I want the key of the lavatory. I'm indisposed," said
Wildney again, in a tone of such disciplined suavity, that the others
shook with laughing.

Mr. Harley opened the door about an inch, and peered about suspiciously.

"Oh, well, you must go and awake Mr. Rose. I don't happen to have the
key to-night." And so saying, he shut the door.

"Phew! Here's a go!" said Wildney, recovering immediately. "It'll never
do to awake old Rose. He'd smell a rat in no time."

"I have it," said Pietrie. "I've got an old nail, with which I believe I
can open the lock quite simply. Let's try."

"Quietly and quick, then," said Eric.

In ten minutes he had silently shot back the lock with the old nail, and
the boys were on the landing. They carried their shoes in their hands,
ran noiselessly down stairs, and went to the same window at which Eric
and Wildney had got out before. Wildney had taken care beforehand to
break the pane and move away the glass, so they had only to loosen the
bar and slip through one by one.

It was cold and very dark, and as on the March morning they stood out
in the playground, all four would rather have been safe and harmlessly
in bed. But the novelty and the excitement of the enterprise bore them
up, and they started off quickly for the house at which Mr. Gordon and
his pupils lived, which was about half a mile from the school. They went
arm in arm to assure each other a little, for at first in their fright
they were inclined to take every post and tree for a man in ambush, and
to hear a recalling voice in every sound of wind and wave.

Not far from Mr. Gordon's was a carpenter's shop, and outside of this
there was generally a ladder standing. They had arranged to carry this
ladder with them (as it was only a short one), climb the low garden wall
with it, and then place it against the house, immediately under the
dovecot which hung by the first story-windows. Wildney, as the lightest
of the four, was to take the birds, while the others held the ladder.

Slanting it so that it should be as far from the side of the window as
possible, Wildney ascended and thrust both hands into the cot. He
succeeded in seizing a pigeon with each hand, but in doing so threw the
other birds into a state of such alarm that they fluttered about in the
wildest manner, and the moment his hands were withdrawn, flew out with a
great flapping of hurried wings.

The noise they made alarmed the plunderer, and he hurried down the
ladder as fast as he could. He handed the pigeons to the others, who
instantly wrung their necks.

"I'm nearly sure I heard somebody stir," said Wildney; "we haven't been
half quiet enough. Here! let's crouch down in this corner."

All four shrank up as close to the wall as they could, and held their
breath. Some one was certainly stirring, and at last they heard the
window open. A head was thrust out, and Mr. Gordon's voice asked
sternly--"Who's there?"

He seemed at once to have caught sight of the ladder, and made an
endeavor to reach it; but though he stretched out his arm at full
length, he could not do so.

"We must cut for it," said Eric; "it's quite too dark for him to see us,
or even to notice that we are boys."

They moved the ladder to the wall, and sprang over, one after the other,
as fast as they could. Eric was last, and just as he got to the top of
the wall he heard the back door open, and some one run out into
the yard.

"Run for your lives," said Eric hurriedly; "it's Gordon, and he's
raising the alarm."

They heard footsteps following them, and an occasional shout of
"thieves! thieves!"

"We must separate and run different ways, or we've no chance of escape.
We'd better turn towards the town to put them off the right scent," said
Eric again.

"Don't leave me," pleaded Wildney; "you know I can't run very fast."

"No, Charlie, I won't;" and grasping his hand, Eric hurried him over the
style and through the fields, while Pietrie and Graham took the opposite
direction.

Some one (they did not know who it was, but suspected it to be Mr.
Gordon's servant-man) was running after them, and they could distinctly
hear his footsteps, which seemed to be half a field distant. He carried
a light, and they heard him panting. They were themselves tired, and in
the utmost trepidation; the usually courageous Wildney was trembling all
over, and his fear communicated itself to Eric. Horrible visions of a
trial for burglary, imprisonment in the castle jail, and perhaps
transportation, presented themselves to their excited imaginations, as
the sound of the footsteps came nearer.

"I can't run any further, Eric," said Wildney. "What shall we do? don't
leave me, for heaven's sake."

"Not I, Charlie. We must hide the minute we get t'other side of this
hedge."

They scrambled over the gate, and plunged into the thickest part of a
plantation close by, lying down on the ground behind some bushes, and
keeping as still as they could, taking care to cover over their
white collars.

The pursuer reached the gate, and no longer hearing footsteps in front
of him, he paused. He went a little distance up the hedge on both sides
and held up his light, but did not detect the cowering boys, and at last
giving up the search in despair, went slowly home. They heard him
plodding back over the field, and it was not until the sound of his
footsteps had died away, that Eric cautiously broke cover, and looked
over the hedge. He saw the man's light gradually getting more distant,
and said, "All right now, Charlie. We must make the best of our
way home."

"Are you sure he's gone?" said Wildney, who had not yet recovered from
his fright.

"Quite; come along. I only hope Pietrie and Graham ain't caught."

They got back about half-past four, and climbed in unheard and
undetected through the window pane. They then stole up stairs with
beating hearts, and sat in Eric's room to wait for the other two. To
their great relief they heard them enter the lavatory about ten
minutes after.

"Were you twigged?" asked Wildney eagerly.

"No," said Graham; "precious near it though. Old Gordon and some men
were after us, but at last we doubled rather neatly, and escaped them.
It's all serene, and we shan't be caught."

"Well, we'd best to bed now," said Eric; "and, to my thinking, we should
be wise to keep a quiet tongue in our heads about this affair."

"Yes, we had better tell _no one_." They agreed, and went off to bed
again. So, next morning, they all four got up quite as if nothing had
happened, and made no allusion to the preceding night, although, they
could not help chuckling inwardly a little when the Gordonites came to
morning school, brimful of a story about their house having been
attacked in the night by thieves, who, after bagging some pigeons, had
been chevied by Gordon and the servants. Wildney professed immense
interest in the incident, and asked many questions, which showed that
there was not a shadow of suspicion in any one's mind as to the
real culprits.

Carter, the school servant, didn't seem to have noticed that the
lavatory door was unlocked, and Mr. Harley never alluded again to his
disturbance in the night. So the theft of the pigeons remained
undiscovered, and remains so till this day. If any old Roslyn boy reads
this veracious history, he will doubtless be astounded to hear that the
burglars on that memorable night were Brio, Pietrie, Graham,
and Wildney.



