CHAPTER IV. WINGS


The next day was very wet--too wet to go out, and far too wet to think
of disturbing a Sand-fairy so sensitive to water that he still, after
thousands of years, felt the pain of once having his left whisker
wetted. It was a long day, and it was not till the afternoon that all
the children suddenly decided to write letters to their mother. It was
Robert who had the misfortune to upset the ink well--an unusually deep
and full one--straight into that part of Anthea's desk where she had
long pretended that an arrangement of mucilage and cardboard painted
with Indian ink was a secret drawer. It was not exactly Robert's fault;
it was only his misfortune that he chanced to be lifting the ink across
the desk just at the moment when Anthea had got it open, and that that
same moment should have been the one chosen by the Lamb to get under
the table and break his squeaking bird. There was a sharp convenient
wire inside the bird, and of course the Lamb ran the wire into Robert's
leg at once; and so, without anyone's meaning to do it the secret drawer
was flooded with ink. At the same time a stream was poured over Anthea's
half-finished letter.

So that her letter was something like this--

          "DARLING MOTHER,--I hope you are quite well, and I
          hope Granny is better. The other day we...."

Then came a flood of ink, and at the bottom these words in pencil--

          "It was not me upset the ink, but it took such a
          time clearing up, so no more as it is
          post-time.--From your loving daughter     "ANTHEA."

Robert's letter had not even been begun. He had been drawing a ship on
the blotting paper while he was trying to think of what to say. And of
course after the ink was upset he had to help Anthea to clean out her
desk, and he promised to make her another secret drawer, better than
the other. And she said, "Well, make it now." So it was post-time and
his letter wasn't done. And the secret drawer wasn't done either.

Cyril wrote a long letter, very fast, and then went to set a trap for
slugs that he had read about in the _Home-made Gardener_, and when it
was post-time the letter could not be found, and it was never found.
Perhaps the slugs ate it.

Jane's letter was the only one that went. She meant to tell her mother
all about the Psammead,--in fact they had all meant to do this,--but she
spent so long thinking how to spell the word that there was no time to
tell the story properly, and it is useless to tell a story unless you
_do_ tell it properly, so she had to be contented with this--

          "MY DEAR MOTHER DEAR,--We are all as good as we
          can, like you told us to, and the Lamb has a
          little cold, but Martha says it is nothing, only
          he upset the gold-fish into himself yesterday
          morning. When we were up at the sand-pit the other
          day we went round by the safe way where carts go,
          and we found  a"--

Half an hour went by before Jane felt quite sure that they could none of
them spell Psammead. And they could not find it in the dictionary
either, though they looked. Then Jane hastily finished her letter--

          "We found a strange thing, but it is nearly
          post-time, so no more at present from your little
          girl,

                                                   "JANE.

          "P.S.--If you could have a wish come true what
          would you have?"

Then the postman was heard blowing his horn, and Robert rushed out in
the rain to stop his cart and give him the letters. And that was how it
happened that, though all the children meant to tell their mother about
the Sand-fairy, somehow or other she never got to know. There were other
reasons why she never got to know, but these come later.

The next day Uncle Richard came and took them all to Maidstone in a
wagonette--all except the Lamb. Uncle Richard was the very best kind of
uncle. He bought them toys at Maidstone. He took them into a shop and
let them all choose exactly what they wanted, without any restrictions
about price, and no nonsense about things being instructive. It is very
wise to let children choose exactly what they like, because they are
very foolish and inexperienced, and sometimes they will choose a really
instructive thing without meaning to do so. This happened to Robert, who
chose, at the last moment, and in a great hurry, a box with pictures on
it of winged bulls with men's heads and winged men with eagles' heads.
He thought there would be animals inside, the same as on the box. When
he got it home it was a Sunday puzzle about ancient Nineveh! The others
chose in haste, and were happy at leisure. Cyril had a model engine, and
the girls had two dolls, as well as a china tea-set with forget-me-nots
on it, to be "between them." The boys' "between them" was bow and arrow.

Then Uncle Richard took them on the beautiful Medway in a boat, and then
they all had tea at a beautiful confectioner's and when they reached
home it was far too late to have any wishes that day.

They did not tell Uncle Richard anything about the Psammead. I do not
know why. And they do not know why. But I daresay you can guess.

The day after Uncle Richard had behaved so handsomely was a very hot day
indeed. The people who decide what the weather is to be, and put its
orders down for it in the newspapers every morning, said afterwards that
it was the hottest day there had been for years. They had ordered it to
be "warmer--some showers," and warmer it certainly was. In fact it was
so busy being warmer that it had no time to attend to the order about
showers, so there weren't any.

Have you ever been up at five o'clock on a fine summer morning? It is
very beautiful. The sunlight is pinky and yellowy, and all the grass and
trees are covered with dew-diamonds. And all the shadows go the opposite
way to the way they do in the evening, which is very interesting and
makes you feel as though you were in a new other world.

Anthea woke at five. She had made herself wake, and I must tell you how
it is done, even if it keeps you waiting for the story to go on.

You get into bed at night, and lie down quite flat on your little back,
with your hands straight down by your sides. Then you say "I _must_ wake
up at five" (or six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or whatever the time
is that you want), and as you say it you push your chin down on your
chest and then whack your head back on the pillow. And you do this as
many times as there are ones in the time you want to wake up at. (It is
quite an easy sum.) Of course everything depends on your really wanting
to get up at five (or six, or seven, or eight, or nine); if you don't
really want to, it's all of no use. But if you do--well, try it and see.
Of course in this, as in doing Latin proses or getting into mischief,
practice makes perfect.

Anthea was quite perfect.

At the very moment when she opened her eyes she heard the black-and-gold
clock down in the dining-room strike eleven. So she knew it was three
minutes to five. The black-and-gold clock always struck wrong, but it
was all right when you knew what it meant. It was like a person talking
a foreign language. If you know the language it is just as easy to
understand as English. And Anthea knew the clock language. She was very
sleepy, but she jumped out of bed and put her face and hands into a
basin of cold water. This is a fairy charm that prevents your wanting to
get back into bed again. Then she dressed, and folded up her night
dress. She did not tumble it together by the sleeves, but folded it by
the seams from the hem, and that will show you the kind of
well-brought-up little girl she was.

Then she took her shoes in her hand and crept softly down the stairs.
She opened the dining-room window and climbed out. It would have been
just as easy to go out by the door, but the window was more romantic,
and less likely to be noticed by Martha.

"I will always get up at five," she said to herself. "It was quite too
awfully pretty for anything."

Her heart was beating very fast, for she was carrying out a plan quite
her own. She could not be sure that it was a good plan, but she was
quite sure that it would not be any better if she were to tell the
others about it. And she had a feeling that, right or wrong, she would
rather go through with it alone. She put on her shoes under the iron
verandah, on the red-and-yellow shining tiles, and then she ran straight
to the sand-pit, and found the Psammead's place, and dug it out; it was
very cross indeed.

"It's too bad," it said, fluffing up its fur as pigeons do their
feathers at Christmas time. "The weather's arctic, and it's the middle
of the night."

"I'm so sorry," said Anthea gently, and she took off her white pinafore
and covered the Sand-fairy up with it, all but its head, its bat's ears,
and its eyes that were like a snail's eyes.

"Thank you," it said, "that's better. What's the wish this morning?"

"I don't know," she said; "that's just it. You see we've been very
unlucky, so far. I wanted to talk to you about it. But--would you mind
not giving me any wishes till after breakfast? It's so hard to talk to
anyone if they jump out at you with wishes you don't really want!"

"You shouldn't say you wish for things if you don't wish for them. In
the old days people almost always knew whether it was Megatherium or
Ichthyosaurus they really wanted for dinner."

"I'll try not to do so," said Anthea, "but I do wish"--

"Look out!" said the Psammead in a warning voice, and it began to blow
itself out.

"Oh, this isn't a magic wish--it's just--I should be so glad if you'd
not swell yourself out and nearly burst to give me anything just now.
Wait till the others are here."

"Well, well," it said indulgently, but it shivered.

"Would you," asked Anthea kindly--"would you like to come and sit on my
lap? You'd be warmer, and I could turn the skirt of my frock up around
you. I'd be very careful."

Anthea had never expected that it would, but it did.

"Thank you," it said; "you really are rather thoughtful." It crept on to
her lap and snuggled down, and she put her arms round it with a rather
frightened gentleness. "Now then!" it said.

"Well then," said Anthea, "everything we have wished has turned out
rather horrid. I wish you would advise us. You are so old, you must be
very wise."

"I was always generous from a child," said the Sand-fairy. "I've spent
the whole of my waking hours in giving. But one thing I won't
give--that's advice."

"You see," Anthea went on, "it's such a wonderful thing--such a
splendid, glorious chance. It's so good and kind and dear of you to give
us our wishes, and it seems such a pity it should all be wasted just
because we are too silly to know what to wish for."

Anthea had meant to say that--and she had not wanted to say it before
the others. It's one thing to say you're silly, and quite another to
say that other people are.

"Child," said the Sand-fairy sleepily, "I can only advise you to think
before you speak"--

"But I thought you never gave advice."

"That piece doesn't count," it said. "You'll never take it! Besides,
it's not original. It's in all the copy-books."

"But won't you just say if you think wings would be a silly wish?"

"Wings?" it said. "I should think you might do worse. Only, take care
you aren't flying high at sunset. There was a little Ninevite boy I
heard of once. He was one of King Sennacherib's sons, and a traveller
brought him a Psammead. He used to keep it in a box of sand on the
palace terrace. It was a dreadful degradation for one of us, of course;
still the boy _was_ the Assyrian King's son. And one day he wished for
wings and got them. But he forgot that they would turn into stone at
sunset, and when they did he fell on to one of the winged lions at the
top of his father's great staircase; and what with _his_ stone wings
and the lion's stone wings--well it's not a very pretty story! But I
believe the boy enjoyed himself very much till then."

"Tell me," said Anthea, "why don't our wishes turn into stone now? Why
do they just vanish?"

"_Autre temps autres moeurs_," said the creature.

"Is that the Ninevite language?" asked Anthea, who had learned no
foreign language at school except French.

"What I mean is," the Psammead went on, "that in the old days people
wished for good solid everyday gifts,--Mammoths and Pterodactyls and
things,--and those could be turned into stone as easy as not. But people
wish such high-flying fanciful things nowadays. How are you going to
turn being beautiful as the day, or being wanted by everybody, into
stone? You see it can't be done. And it would never do to have two
rules, so they simply vanish. If being beautiful as the day _could_ be
turned into stone it would last an awfully long time, you know--much
longer than you would. Just look at the Greek statues. It's just as
well as it is. Good-bye. I _am_ so sleepy."

It jumped off her lap--dug frantically, and vanished.

Anthea was late for breakfast. It was Robert who quietly poured a
spoonful of molasses down the Lamb's frock, so that he had to be taken
away and washed thoroughly directly after breakfast. And it was of
course a very naughty thing to do; yet it served two purposes--it
delighted the Lamb, who loved above all things to be completely sticky,
and it engaged Martha's attention so that the others could slip away to
the sand-pit without the Lamb.

They did it, and in the lane Anthea, breathless from the hurry of that
slipping, panted out--

"I want to propose we take turns to wish. Only, nobody's to have a wish
if the others don't think it's a nice wish. Do you agree?"

"Who's to have first wish?" asked Robert cautiously.

"Me, if you don't mind," said Anthea apologetically. "And I've thought
about it--and it's _wings_."

There was a silence. The others rather wanted to find fault, but it was
hard, because the word "wings" raised a flutter of joyous excitement in
every breast.

"Not so dusty," said Cyril generously; and Robert added, "Really,
Panther, you're not quite such a fool as you look."

Jane said, "I think it would be perfectly lovely. It's like a bright
dream of delirium."

They found the Sand-fairy easily. Anthea said--

"I wish we all had beautiful wings to fly with."

The Sand-fairy blew himself out, and next moment each child felt a funny
feeling, half heaviness and half lightness, on its shoulders. The
Psammead put its head on one side and turned its snail eyes from one
side to the other.

[The Sand-fairy blew himself out]

"Not so bad," it said dreamily. "But really, Robert, you're not quite
such an angel as you look." Robert almost blushed.

The wings were very big, and more beautiful than you can possibly
imagine--for they were soft and smooth, and every feather lay neatly in
its place. And the feathers were of the most lovely mixed changing
colors, like the rainbow, or iridescent glass, or the beautiful scum
that sometimes floats on water that is not at all nice to drink.

"Oh--but how can we fly?" Jane said, standing anxiously first on one
foot and then on the other.

"Look out!" said Cyril; "you're treading on my wing."

"Does it hurt?" asked Anthea with interest; but no one answered, for
Robert had spread his wings and jumped up, and now he was slowly rising
in the air. He looked very awkward in his knickerbocker suit--his boots
in particular hung helplessly, and seemed much larger than when he was
standing in them. But the others cared but little how he looked,--or how
they looked, for that matter. For now they all spread out their wings
and rose in the air. Of course you all know what flying feels like,
because everyone has dreamed about flying, and is seems so beautifully
easy--only, you can never remember how you did it; and as a rule you
have to do it without wings, in your dreams, which is more clever and
uncommon, but not so easy to remember the rule for. Now the four
children rose flapping from the ground, and you can't think how good the
air felt as it ran against their faces. Their wings were tremendously
wide when they were spread out, and they had to fly quite a long way
apart so as not to get in each other's way. But little things like this
are easily learned.

All the words in the English Dictionary, and in the Greek Lexicon as
well, are, I find, of no use at all to tell you exactly what it feels
like to be flying, so I will not try. But I will say that to look _down_
on the fields and woods instead of _along_ at them, is something like
looking at a beautiful live map, where, instead of silly colors on
paper, you have real moving sunny woods and green fields laid out one
after the other. As Cyril said, and I can't think where he got hold of
such a strange expression, "It does you a fair treat!" It was most
wonderful and more like real magic than any wish the children had had
yet. They flapped and flew and sailed on their great rainbow wings,
between green earth and blue sky; and they flew over Rochester and then
swerved round towards Maidstone, and presently they all began to feel
extremely hungry. Curiously enough, this happened when they were flying
rather low, and just as they were crossing an orchard where some early
plums shone red and ripe.

[They flew over Rochester]

They paused on their wings. I cannot explain to you how this is done,
but it is something like treading water when you are swimming, and hawks
do it extremely well.

"Yes, I daresay," said Cyril, though no one had spoken. "But stealing is
stealing even if you've got wings."

"Do you really think so?" said Jane briskly. "If you've got wings you're
a bird, and no one minds birds breaking the commandments. At least,
they may _mind_, but the birds always do it, and no one scolds them or
sends them to prison."

It was not so easy to perch on a plum-tree as you might think, because
the rainbow wings were so _very_ large; but somehow they all managed to
do it, and the plums were certainly very sweet and juicy.

Fortunately, it was not till they had all had quite as many plums as
were good for them that they saw a stout man, who looked exactly as
though he owned the plum-trees, come hurrying through the orchard gate
with a thick stick, and with one accord they disentangled their wings
from the plum-laden branches and began to fly.

The man stopped short, with his mouth open. For he had seen the boughs
of his trees moving and twitching, and he had said to himself, "Them
young varmint--at it again!" And he had come out at once, for the lads
of the village had taught him in past seasons that plums want looking
after. But when he saw the rainbow wings flutter up out of the
plum-tree he felt that he must have gone quite mad, and he did not like
the feeling at all. And when Anthea looked down and saw his mouth go
slowly open, and stay so, and his face become green and mauve in
patches, she called out--

"Don't be frightened," and felt hastily in her pocket for a
threepenny-bit with a hole in it, which she had meant to hang on a
ribbon round her neck, for luck. She hovered round the unfortunate
plum-owner, and said, "We have had some of your plums; we thought it
wasn't stealing, but now I am not so sure. So here's some money to pay
for them."

She swooped down toward the terror-stricken grower of plums, and slipped
the coin into the pocket of his jacket, and in a few flaps she had
rejoined the others.

The farmer sat down on the grass, suddenly and heavily.

[The farmer sat down on the grass suddenly and heavily]

"Well--I'm blessed!" he said. "This here is what they call delusions, I
suppose. But this here threepenny"--he had pulled it out and bitten
it,--"_that's_ real enough. Well, from this day forth I'll be a better
man. It's the kind of thing to sober a chap for life, this is. I'm glad
it was only wings, though. I'd rather see the birds as aren't there, and
couldn't be, even if they pretend to talk, than some things as I could
name."

He got up slowly and heavily, and went indoors, and he was so nice to
his wife that day that she felt quite happy, and said to herself, "Law,
whatever have a-come to the man!" and smartened herself up and put a
blue ribbon bow at the place where her collar fastened on, and looked so
pretty that he was kinder than ever. So perhaps the winged children
really did do one good thing that day. If so, it was the only one; for
really there is nothing like wings for getting you into trouble. But, on
the other hand, if you are in trouble, there is nothing like wings for
getting you out of it.

This was the case in the matter of the fierce dog who sprang out at them
when they had folded up their wings as small as possible and were going
up to a farm door to ask for a crust of bread and cheese, for in
spite of the plums they were soon just as hungry as ever again.

Now there is no doubt whatever that, if the four had been ordinary
wingless children, that black and fierce dog would have had a good bite
out of the brown-stockinged leg of Robert, who was the nearest. But at
its first growl there was a flutter of wings, and the dog was left to
strain at his chain and stand on his hind-legs as if he were trying to
fly too.

They tried several other farms, but at those where there were no dogs
the people were far too frightened to do anything but scream; and at
last, when it was nearly four o'clock, and their wings were getting
miserably stiff and tired, they alighted on a church-tower and held a
council of war.

"We can't possibly fly all the way home without dinner _or_ tea," said
Robert with desperate decision.

"And nobody will give us any dinner, or even lunch, let alone tea," said
Cyril.

"Perhaps the clergyman here might," suggested Anthea. "He must know all
about angels"--

"Anybody could see we're not that," said Jane. "Look at Robert's boots
and Squirrel's plaid necktie."

"Well," said Cyril firmly, "if the country you're in won't _sell_
provisions, you _take_ them. In wars I mean. I'm quite certain you do.
And even in other stories no good brother would allow his little sisters
to starve in the midst of plenty."

"Plenty?" repeated Robert hungrily; and the others looked vaguely round
the bare leads of the church-tower, and murmured, "In the midst of?"

"Yes," said Cyril impressively. "There is a larder window at the side of
the clergyman's house, and I saw things to eat inside--custard pudding
and cold chicken and tongue--and pies--and jam. It's rather a high
window--but with wings"--

"How clever of you!" said Jane.

"Not at all," said Cyril modestly; "any born general--Napoleon or the
Duke of Marlborough--would have seen it just the same as I did."

"It seems very wrong," said Anthea.

"Nonsense," said Cyril. "What was it Sir Philip Sidney said when the
soldier wouldn't give him a drink?--'My necessity is greater than his.'"

"We'll club together our money, though, and leave it to pay for the
things, won't we?" Anthea was persuasive, and very nearly in tears,
because it is most trying to feel enormously hungry and unspeakably
sinful at one and the same time.

"Some of it," was the cautious reply.

Everyone now turned out its pockets on the lead roof of the tower, where
visitors for the last hundred and fifty years had cut their own and
their sweethearts' initials with penknives in the soft lead. There was
five-and-seven-pence halfpenny altogether, and even the upright Anthea
admitted that that was too much to pay for four people's dinners. Robert
said he thought eighteenpence.

[Every one now turned out his pockets]

And half-a-crown was finally agreed to be "handsome."

So Anthea wrote on the back of her last term's report, which happened to
be in her pocket, and from which she first tore her own name and that of
the school, the following letter:--

          "DEAR REVEREND CLERGYMAN,--We are very hungry
          indeed because of having to fly all day, and we
          think it is not stealing when you are starving to
          death. We are afraid to ask you for fear you
          should say 'No,' because of course you know about
          angels, but you would not think we were angels. We
          will only take the necessities of life, and no
          pudding or pie, to show you it is not grediness
          but true starvation that makes us make your larder
          stand and deliver. But we are not highwaymen by
          trade."

"Cut it short," said the others with one accord. And Anthea hastily
added--

          "Our intentions are quite honourable if you only
          knew. And here is half-a-crown to show we are
          sinseer and grateful.

          "Thank you for your kind hospitality.

                                          "FROM US FOUR."

The half-crown was wrapped in this letter, and all the children felt
that when the clergyman had read it he would understand everything, as
well as anyone could who had not even seen the wings.

"Now," said Cyril, "of course there's some risk; we'd better fly
straight down the other side of the tower and then flutter low across
the churchyard and in through the shrubbery. There doesn't seem to be
anyone about. But you never know. The window looks out into the
shrubbery. It is embowered in foliage, like a window in a story. I'll go
in and get the things. Robert and Anthea can take them as I hand them
out through the window; and Jane can keep watch,--her eyes are
sharp,--and whistle if she sees anyone about. Shut up, Robert! she can
whistle quite well enough for that, anyway. It ought not to be a very
good whistle--it'll sound more natural and birdlike. Now then--off we
go!"

I cannot pretend that stealing is right. I can only say that on this
occasion it did not look like stealing to the hungry four, but appeared
in the light of a fair and reasonable business transaction. They had
never happened to learn that a tongue,--hardly cut into,--a chicken and
a half, a loaf of bread, and a syphon of soda-water cannot be bought in
the stores for half-a-crown. These were the necessaries of life, which
Cyril handed out of the larder window when, quite unobserved and without
hindrance or adventure, he had led the others to that happy spot. He
felt that to refrain from jam, apple pie, cake, and mixed candied peel,
was a really heroic act--and I agree with him. He was also proud of not
taking the custard pudding,--and there I think he was wrong,--because if
he had taken it there would have been a difficulty about returning the
dish; no one, however starving, has a right to steal china pie-dishes
with little pink flowers on them. The soda-water syphon was different.
They could not do without something to drink, and as the maker's name
was on it they felt sure it would be returned to him wherever they might
leave it. If they had time they would take it back themselves. The
man appeared to live in Rochester, which would not be much out of their
way home.

[These were the necessaries of life]

Everything was carried up to the top of the tower, and laid down on a
sheet of kitchen paper which Cyril had found on the top shelf of the
larder. As he unfolded it, Anthea said, "I don't think _that's_ a
necessity of life."

"Yes, it is," said he. "We must put the things down somewhere to cut
them up; and I heard father say the other day people got diseases from
germans in rain-water. Now there must be lots of rain-water here,--and
when it dries up the germans are left, and they'd get into the things,
and we should all die of scarlet fever."

"What are germans?"

"Little waggly things you see with microscopes," said Cyril, with a
scientific air. "They give you every illness you can think of. I'm sure
the paper was a necessary, just as much as the bread and meat and water.
Now then! Oh, I'm hungry!"

I do not wish to describe the picnic party on the top of the tower. You
can imagine well enough what it is like to carve a chicken and a tongue
with a knife that has only one blade and that snapped off short about
half-way down. But it was done. Eating with your fingers is greasy and
difficult--and paper dishes soon get to look very spotty and horrid. But
one thing you _can't_ imagine, and that is how soda-water behaves when
you try to drink it straight out of a syphon--especially a quite full
one. But if imagination will not help you, experience will, and you can
easily try it for yourself if you can get a grown-up to give you the
syphon. If you want to have a really thorough experience, put the tube
in your mouth and press the handle very suddenly and very hard. You had
better do it when you are alone--and out of doors is best for this
experiment.

However you eat them, tongue and chicken and new bread are very good
things, and no one minds being sprinkled a little with soda-water on a
really fine hot day. So that everyone enjoyed the dinner very much
indeed, and everyone ate as much as it possibly could: first, because it
was extremely hungry; and secondly, because, as I said, tongue and
chicken and new bread are very nice.

Now, I daresay you will have noticed that if you have to wait for your
dinner till long after the proper time, and then eat a great deal more
dinner than usual, and sit in the hot sun on the top of a
church-tower--or even anywhere else--you become soon and strangely
sleepy. Now Anthea and Jane and Cyril and Robert were very like you in
many ways, and when they had eaten all they could, and drunk all there
was, they became sleepy, strangely and soon--especially Anthea, because
she had gotten up so early.

[The children were fast asleep]

One by one they left off talking and leaned back, and before it was a
quarter of an hour after dinner they had all curled round and tucked
themselves up under their large soft warm wings and were fast asleep.
And the sun was sinking slowly in the west. (I must say it was in the
west, because it is usual in books to say so, for fear careless people
should think it was setting in the east. In point of fact, it was not
exactly in the west either--but that's near enough.) The sun, I repeat,
was sinking slowly in the west, and the children slept warmly and
happily on--for wings are cosier than eider-down quilts to sleep under.
The shadow of the church-tower fell across the churchyard, and across
the Vicarage, and across the field beyond; and presently there were no
more shadows, and the sun had set, and the wings were gone. And still
the children slept. But not for long. Twilight is very beautiful, but it
is chilly; and you know, however sleepy you are, you wake up soon enough
if your brother or sister happens to be up first and pulls your blankets
off you. The four wingless children shivered and woke. And there they
were,--on the top of a church-tower in the dusky twilight, with blue
stars coming out by ones and twos and tens and twenties over their
heads,--miles away from home, with three shillings and three-halfpence
in their pockets, and a doubtful act about the necessities of life to
be accounted for if anyone found them with the soda-water syphon.

They looked at each other. Cyril spoke first, picking up the syphon--

"We'd better get along down and get rid of this beastly thing. It's dark
enough to leave it on the clergyman's doorstep, I should think. Come
on."

There was a little turret at the corner of the tower, and the little
turret had a door in it. They had noticed this when they were eating,
but had not explored it, as you would have done in their place. Because,
of course, when you have wings and can explore the whole sky, doors seem
hardly worth exploring.

Now they turned towards it.

"Of course," said Cyril "this is the way down."

It was. But the door was locked on the inside!

And the world was growing darker and darker. And they were miles from
home. And there was the soda-water syphon.

I shall not tell you whether anyone cried, nor, if so, how many cried,
nor who cried. You will be better employed in making up your minds what
you would have done if you had been in their place.




