CHAPTER XX.


The summer had now advanced, when Oswald one day said to Edward,

"Have you heard the news, sir?"

"Nothing very particular," replied Edward; "I know that General
Cromwell is over in Ireland, and they say very successful; but I have
cared little for particulars."

"They say a great deal more, sir," replied Oswald; "they say that the
king is in Scotland, and that the Scotch have raised an army for him."

"Indeed!" replied Edward, "that is news indeed! The intendant has never
mentioned it to me."

"I dare say not, sir; for he knows your feelings, and would sorry to
part with you."

"I will certainly speak to him on the subject," said Edward, at the
"risk of his displeasure; and join the army I will, if I find what you
say is true. I should hold myself a craven to remain here while the
king is fighting for his own, and not to be at his side."

"Well, sir, I think it is true, for I heard that the Parliament had
sent over for General Cromwell to leave Ireland, and lead the troops
against the Scotch army."

"You drive me mad, Oswald! I will go to the intendant immediately!"

Edward, much excited by the intelligence, went into the room where he
usually sat with the intendant. The latter, who was at his desk, looked
up, and saw how flushed Edward was, and said very quietly,

"Edward, you are excited, I presume, from hearing the news which has
arrived?"

"Yes, sir, I am very much so; and I regret very much that I should be
the last to whom such important news is made known."

"It is, as you say, important news," replied the intendant; "but if you
will sit down, we will talk a little upon the subject."

Edward took a chair, and the intendant said,

"I have no doubt that your present feeling is to go to Scotland, and
join the army without delay."

"Such is my intention, I candidly confess, sir. It is my duty."

"Perhaps you may be persuaded to the contrary before we part," replied
the intendant. "The first duty you owe is to your family in their
present position; they depend upon you; and a false step on your part
would be their ruin. How can you leave them, and leave my employ,
without it being known for what purpose you are gone? It is impossible!
I must myself make it known, and even then it would be very injurious
to me, the very circumstance of my having one of your party in my
service. I am suspected by many already, in consequence of the part I
have taken against the murder of the late king, and also of the lords
who have since suffered. But, Edward, I did not communicate this
intelligence to you for many reasons. I knew that it would soon come to
your ears, and I thought it better that I should be more prepared to
show you that you may do yourself and me harm, and can do no good to
the king. I will now show you that I do put confidence in you; and if
you will read these letters, they will prove to you that I am correct
in what I assert."

The intendant handed three letters to Edward, by which it was evident
that all the king's friends in England were of opinion that the time
was not ripe for the attempt, and that it would be only a sacrifice to
stir in the matter; that the Scotch army raised was composed of those
who were the greatest enemies to the king, and that the best thing that
could happen for the king's interest would be that they were destroyed
by Cromwell; that it was impossible for the English adherents of
Charles to join them, and that the Scotch did not wish them so to do.

"You are no politician, Edward," said the intendant, smiling, as Edward
laid the letters down on the table. "You must admit that, in showing
you these letters, I have put the utmost confidence in you."

"You have, indeed, sir; and, thanking you for having so done, I need
hardly add that your confidence will never be betrayed."

"That I am sure of; and I trust you will now agree with me and my
friends that the best thing is to remain quiet."

"Certainly, sir, and in future I will be guided by you."

"That is all I require of you; and, after that promise, you shall hear
all the news as soon as it arrives. There are thousands who are just as
anxious to see the king on the throne again as you are, Edward--and you
now know that I am one of them; but the hour is not yet come, and we
must bide our time. Depend upon it, General Cromwell will scatter that
army like chaff. He is on his march now. After what has passed between
us this day, Edward, I shall talk unreserved to you on what is going
on."

"I thank you, sir, and I promise you faithfully, as I said before, not
only to be guided by your advice, but to be most secret in all that you
may trust me with."

"I have confidence in you, Edward Armitage; and now we will drop the
subject for the present; Patience and Clara want you to walk with them,
so good-by for the present."

Edward left the intendant, much pleased with the interview. The
intendant kept his word, and concealed nothing from Edward. All turned
out as the intendant had foretold. The Scotch army was cut to pieces by
Cromwell, and the king retreated to the Highlands; and Edward now felt
satisfied that he could do no better than be guided by the intendant in
all his future undertakings.

We must now pass over some time in a few words. Edward continued at the
intendant's, and gave great satisfaction to Mr. Heatherstone. He passed
his time very agreeably, sometimes going out to shoot deer with Oswald,
and often supplying venison to his brother and sisters at the cottage.
During the autumn, Patience very often went to the cottage, and
occasionally Mr. Heatherstone paid them a visit; but after the winter
set in, Edward came over by himself, shooting as he went; and when he
and Smoker came to the cottage, Billy always had a journey to go for
the venison left in the forest. Patience sent Alice many little things
for the use of her and Edith, and some very good books for them to
read; and Humphrey, during the evenings, read with his sisters, that
they might learn what he could teach them. Pablo also learned to read
and write. Humphrey and Pablo had worked at the saw-pit, and had sawed
out a large quantity of boards and timber for building, but the
building was put off till the spring.

The reader may recollect that Edward had proposed to Humphrey that he
should ascertain whether what the robber had stated before his death
relative to his having concealed his ill-gotten wealth under the tree
which was struck by lightning was true. About ten days afterward
Humphrey set off on this expedition. He did not take Pablo with him,
as, although he had a very good opinion of him, he agreed with Oswald
that temptation should not be put in his way. Humphrey considered that
it would be the best plan to go at once to Clara's cottage, and from
that proceed to find the oak-tree mentioned by the robber. When he
arrived at the thicket which surrounded the cottage, it occurred to him
that he would just go through it and see if it was in the state which
they had left it in; for after the intendant had been there, he had
given directions to his men to remain and bury the bodies, and then to
lock up the doors of the cottage, and bring the keys to him, which had
been done. Humphrey tied Billy and the cart to a tree, and walked
through the thicket. As he approached the cottage he heard voices; this
induced him to advance very carefully, for he had not brought his gun
with him. He crouched down as he came to the opening before the
cottage. The doors and windows were open, and there were two men
sitting outside, cleaning their guns; and in one of them Humphrey
recognized the man Corbould, who had been discharged by the intendant
as soon as his wound had been cured, and who was supposed to have gone
to London. Humphrey was too far off to hear what they said; he remained
there some time, and three more men came out of the cottage. Satisfied
with what he had seen, Humphrey cautiously retreated, and, gaining the
outside of the thicket, led away Billy and the cart over the turf, that
the noise of the wheels might not be heard.

"This bodes no good," thought Humphrey as he went along, every now and
then looking back to ascertain if the men had come out and seen him.
"That Corbould we know has vowed vengeance against Edward, and all of
us; and has, no doubt, joined those robbers--for robbers they must
be--that he may fulfill his vow. It is fortunate that I have made the
discovery and I will send over immediately to the intendant." As soon
as a clump of trees had shut out the thicket, and he had no longer any
fear of being seen by these people, Humphrey went in the direction
which the robber had mentioned, and soon afterward he perceived the oak
scathed with lightning, which stood by itself on a green spot of about
twenty acres. It had been a noble tree before it had been destroyed;
now it spread its long naked arms, covering a large space of ground,
but without the least sign of vegetation or life remaining. The trunk
was many feet in diameter, and was apparently quite sound, although the
tree was dead. Humphrey left Billy to feed on the herbage close by, and
then, from the position of the sun in the heavens, ascertained the
point at which he was to dig. First looking around him to see that he
was not overlooked, he took his spade and pick-ax out of the cart and
begun his task. There was a spot not quite so green as the rest, which
Humphrey thought likely to be the very place that he should dig at, as
probably it was not green from the soil having been removed. He
commenced at this spot, and, after a few moments' labor, his pick-ax
struck upon something hard, which, on clearing away the earth, he
discovered to be a wooden lid of a box. Satisfied that he was right,
Humphrey now worked hard, and in a few minutes he had cleared away
sufficiently to be able to lift out the box and place it on the turf.
He was about to examine it, when he perceived, at about five hundred
yards' distance, three men coming toward him. "They have discovered
me," thought Humphrey; "and I must be off as soon as I can." He ran to
Billy, who was close to him, and bringing the cart to where the box
lay, he lifted it in. As he was getting in himself, with the reins in
his hands, he perceived that the three men were running toward him as
fast as they could, and that they all had guns in their hands. They
were not more than a hundred and fifty yards from him when Humphrey set
off, putting Billy to a full trot.

The three men, observing this, called out to Humphrey to stop, or they
would fire; but Humphrey's only reply was giving a lash to Billy, which
set him off at a gallop. The men immediately fired, and the bullets
whistled past Humphrey without doing any harm. Humphrey looked round,
and finding that he had increased his distance, pulled up the pony, and
went at a more moderate pace. "You'll not catch me," thought Humphrey;
"and your guns are not loaded, so I'll tantalize you a little." He made
Billy walk, and turned round to see what the men were about; they had
arrived at where he had dug out the box, and were standing round the
hole, evidently aware that it was no use following him. "Now," thought
Humphrey as he went along at a faster pace, "those fellows will wonder
what I have been digging up. The villains little think that I know
where to find them, and they have proved what they are by firing at me.
Now, what must I do? They may follow me to the cottage, for I have no
doubt that they know where we live, and that Edward is at the
intendant's. They may come and attack us, and I dare not leave the
cottage tonight, or send Pablo away, in case they should; but I will
tomorrow morning." Humphrey considered, as he went along, all the
circumstances and probabilities, and decided that he would act as he at
first proposed to himself. In an hour he was at the cottage; and as
soon as Alice had given him his dinner--for he was later than the usual
dinner hour--he told her what had taken place.

"Where is Pablo?"

"He has been working in the garden with Edith all the day," replied
Alice.

"Well, dear, I hope they will not come tonight: tomorrow I will have
them all in custody; but if they do come, we must do our best to beat
them off. It is fortunate that Edward left the guns and pistols which
he found in Clara's cottage, as we shall have no want of firearms; and
we can barricade the doors and windows, so that they can not get in in
a hurry; but I must have Pablo to help me, for there is no time to be
lost."

"But can not I help you, Humphrey?" said Alice. "Surely I can do
something?"

"We will see, Alice; but I think I can do without you. We have still
plenty of daylight. I will take the box into your room."

Humphrey, who had only taken the box out of the cart and carried it
within the threshold of the door, now took it into his sisters'
bedroom, and then went out and called Pablo, who came running to him.

"Pablo," said Humphrey, "we must bring to the cottage some of the large
pieces we sawed out for rafters; for I should not be surprised if the
cottage were attacked this night." He then told Pablo what had taken
place. "You see, Pablo, I dare not send to the intendant to-night, in
case the robbers should come here."

"No, not send to-night," said Pablo; "stay here and fight them; first
make door fast, then cut hole to fire through."

"Yes, that was my idea. You don't mind fighting them, Pablo?"

"No; fight hard for Missy Alice and Missy Edith," said Pablo; "fight
for you too, Massa Humphrey, and fight for myself," added Pablo,
laughing.

They then went for the pieces of squared timber, brought them from the
saw-pit to the cottage, and very soon fitted them to the doors and
windows, so as to prevent several men, with using all their strength,
from forcing them open.

"That will do," said Humphrey; "and now get me the small saw, Pablo,
and I will cut a hole or two to fire through."

It was dark before they had finished, and then they made all fast, and
went to Pablo's room for the arms, which they got ready for service,
and loaded.

"Now we are all ready, Alice, so let us have our supper," said
Humphrey. "We will make a fight for it, and they shall not get in so
easily as they think."

After they had had their supper, Humphrey said the prayers, and told
his sisters to go to bed.

"Yes, Humphrey, we will go to bed, but we will not undress, for if they
come, I must be up to help you. I can load a gun, you know, and Edith
can take them to you as fast as I load them. Won't you, Edith?"

"Yes, I will bring you the guns, Humphrey, and you shall shoot them,"
replied Edith.

Humphrey kissed his sisters, and they went to their room. He then put a
light in the chimney, that he might not have to get one in case the
robbers came, and then desired Pablo to go and lie down on his bed, as
he intended to do the same. Humphrey remained awake till past three
o'clock in the morning, but no robbers came. Pablo was snoring loud,
and at last Humphrey fell asleep himself, and did not wake till broad
daylight. He got up, and found Alice and Edith were already in the
sitting-room, lighting the fire.

"I would not wake you, Humphrey, as you had been sitting up so long.
The robbers have not made their appearance, that is clear; shall we
unbar the door and window-shutters now?"

"Yes, I think we may. Here, Pablo!"

"Yes," replied Pablo, coming out half asleep; "what the matter? thief
come?"

"No," replied Edith, "thief not come, but sun shine, and lazy Pablo not
get up."

"Up now, Missy Edith."

"Yes, but not awake yet."

"Yes, Missy Edith, quite awake."

"Well, then, help me to undo the door, Pablo."

They took down the barricades, and Humphrey opened the door cautiously,
and looked out.

"They won't come now, at all events, I should think," observed
Humphrey; "but there is no saying--they may be prowling about, and may
think it easier to get in during daytime than at night. Go out, Pablo,
and look about every where; take a pistol with you, and fire it off if
there is any danger, and then come back as fast as you can."

Pablo took the pistol, and then Humphrey went out of the door and
looked well round in front of the cottage, but he would not leave the
door till he was assured that no one was there. Pablo returned soon
after, saying that he had looked round every where, and into the
cow-house and yard, and there was nobody to be seen. This satisfied
Humphrey, and they returned to the cottage.

"Now, Pablo, get your breakfast, while I write the letter to the
intendant," said Humphrey; "and then you must saddle Billy, and go over
to him as fast as you can with the letter. You can tell him all I have
not said in it. I shall expect you back at night, and some people with
you."

"I see," said Pablo, who immediately busied himself with some cold meat
which Alice put before him. Pablo had finished his breakfast and
brought Billy to the door, before Humphrey had finished his letter. As
soon as it was written and folded, Pablo set off, as fast as Billy
could go, to the other side of the forest.

Humphrey continued on the look-out during the whole day, with his gun
on his arm, and his two dogs by his side; for he knew the dogs would
give notice of the approach of any one, long before he might see them;
but nothing occurred during the whole day; and when the evening closed
in he barricaded the doors and windows, and remained on the watch with
the dogs, waiting for the coming of the robbers, or for the arrival of
the party which he expected would be sent by the intendant to take the
robbers. Just as it was dark, Pablo returned with a note from Edward,
saying that he would be over, and at the cottage by ten o'clock, with a
large party.

Humphrey had said in his letter, that it would be better that any force
sent by the intendant should not arrive till after dark, as the robbers
might be near and perceive them, and then they might escape; he did not
therefore expect them to come till some time after dark. Humphrey was
reading a book--Pablo was dozing in the chimney corner--the two girls
had retired into their room and had lain down on the bed in their
clothes, when the dogs both gave a low growl.

"Somebody come," said Pablo, starting up.

Again the dogs growled, and Humphrey made a sign to Pablo to hold his
tongue. A short time of anxious silence succeeded, for it was
impossible to ascertain whether the parties were friends or enemies.
The dogs now sprung up and barked furiously at the door, and as soon as
Humphrey had silenced them, a voice was heard outside, begging for
admission to a poor benighted traveler. This was sufficient; it could
not be the party from the intendant's, but the robbers who wished to
induce them to open the door. Pablo put a gun into Humphrey's hand, and
took another for himself; he then removed the light into the chimney,
and on the application from outside being repeated, Humphrey answered,

"That he never opened the door at that hour of the night, and that it
was useless their remaining."

No answer or repetition of the request was made, but, as Humphrey
retreated with Pablo into the fireplace, a gun was fired into the lock
of the door, which was blown off into the room, and, had it not been
for the barricades, the doors must have flown open. The robbers
appeared surprised at such not being the case, and one of them inserted
his arm into the hole made in the door, to ascertain what might be the
further obstacle to open it, when Pablo slipped past Humphrey, and
gaining the door, discharged his gun under the arm which had been
thrust into the hole in the door. The party, whoever it might have
been, gave a loud cry, and fell at the threshold outside.

"I think that will do," said Humphrey: "we must not take more life than
is necessary. I had rather that you had fired through his arm--it would
have disabled him, and that would have sufficed."

"Kill much better," said Pablo. "Corbould shot through leg, come again
to rob; suppose shot dead, never rob more."

The dogs now flew to the back of the cottage, evidently pointing out
that the robbers were attempting that side. Humphrey put his gun
through the hole in the door, and discharged it.

"Why you do that, Massa Humphrey? nobody there!"

"I know that, Pablo; but if the people are coming from the intendant's,
they will see the flash and perhaps hear the report, and it will let
them know what is going on."

"There is another gun loaded, Humphrey," said Alice, who with Edith had
joined them without Humphrey observing it.

"Thanks, love; but you and Edith must not remain here; sit down on the
hearth, and then you will be sheltered from any bullet which they may
fire into the house. I have no fear of their getting in, and we shall
have help directly, I have no doubt. Pablo, I shall fire through the
back door; they must be there, for the dogs have their noses under it,
and are so violent. Do you fire another gun, as a signal, through the
hole in the front door."

Humphrey stood within four feet of the back door, and fired just above
where the dogs held their noses and barked. Pablo discharged his gun as
directed, and then returned to reload the guns. The dogs were now more
quiet, and it appeared as if the robbers had retreated from the back
door. Pablo blew out the light, which had been put more in the center
of the room when Alice and Edith took possession of the fireplace.

"No fear, Missy Edith, I know where find every thing," said Pablo, who
now went and peered through the hole in the front door, to see if the
robbers were coming to it again; but he could see and hear nothing for
some time.

At last the attack was renewed; the dogs flew backward and forward,
sometimes to one door and then to another, as if both were to be
assailed; and at the same time a crash in Alice's bedchamber told them
that the robbers had burst in the small window in that room, which
Humphrey had not paid any attention to, as it was so small that a man
could hardly introduce his body through it. Humphrey immediately called
Holdfast and opened the door of the room, for he thought that a man
forcing his way in would be driven back or held by the dog, and he and
Pablo dared not leave the two doors. Watch, the other dog, followed
Holdfast into the bedroom; and oaths and curses, mingled with the
savage yells of the dogs, told them that a conflict was going on. Both
doors were now battered with heavy pieces of timber at the same time,
and Pablo said,

"Great many robbers here."

A moment or more had passed, during which Pablo and Humphrey had both
again fired their guns through the door, when, of a sudden, other
sounds were heard--shots were fired outside, loud cries, and angry
oaths and exclamations.

"The intendant's people are come," said Humphrey, "I am sure of it."

Shortly afterward Humphrey heard his name called by Edward, and he
replied, and went to the door and undid the barricades.

"Get a light, Alice, dear," said Humphrey, "we are all safe now. I will
open the door directly, Edward, but in the dark I can not see the
fastenings."

"Are you all safe, Humphrey?"

"Yes, all safe, Edward. Wait till Alice brings a light,"

Alice soon brought one, and then the door was unfastened. Edward
stepped over the body of a man which lay at the threshold, saying--

"You have settled somebody there, at all events," and then caught Edith
and Alice in his arms.

He was followed by Oswald and some other men, leading in the prisoners.

"Bind that fellow fast, Oswald," said Edward. "Get another light,
Pablo; let us see who it is that lies outside the door."

"First see who is in my bedroom, Edward," said Alice, "for the dogs are
still there."

"In your bedroom, dearest? Well, then, let us go there first."

Edward went in with Humphrey, and found a man half in the window and
half out, held by the throat and apparently suffocated by the two dogs.
He took the dogs off; and desiring the men to secure the robber, and
ascertain whether he was alive or not, he returned to the sitting-room,
and then went to examine the body outside the door.

"Corbould, as I live!" cried Oswald.

"Yes," replied Edward, "he has gone to his account. God forgive him!"

On inquiry they found, that of all the robbers, to the number of ten,
not one had escaped--eight they had made prisoners, Corbould, and the
man whom the dogs had seized, and who was found to be quite dead, made
up the number. The robbers were all bound and guarded; and then,
leaving them under the charge of Oswald and five of his men, Edward and
Humphrey set off with seven more to Clara's cottage, to ascertain if
there were any more to be found there. They arrived by two o'clock in
the morning, and, on knocking several times, the door was opened and
they seized another man, the only one who was found in it. They then
went back to the cottage with their prisoner, and by the time that they
had arrived it was daylight. As soon as the party sent by the intendant
had been supplied with a breakfast, Edward bade farewell to Humphrey
and his sisters, that he might return and deliver up his prisoners.
Pablo went with him to bring back the cart which carried the two dead
bodies. This capture cleared the forest of the robbers which had so
long infested it, for they never had any more attempts made from that
time.

Before Edward left, Humphrey and he examined the box which Humphrey had
dug up from under the oak, and which had occasioned such danger to the
inmates of the cottage; for one of the men stated to Edward that they
suspected that the box which they had seen Humphrey dig out contained
treasure, and that without they had seen him in possession of it, they
never should have attacked the cottage, although Corbould had often
persuaded them so to do; but as they knew that he was only seeking
revenge--and they required money to stimulate them--they had refused,
as they considered that there was nothing to be obtained in the cottage
worth the risk, as they knew that the inmates had firearms, and would
defend themselves. On examination of its contents, they found in the
box a sum of 40 pounds in gold, a bag of silver, and some other
valuables in silver spoons, candlesticks, and ornaments for women.
Edward took a list of the contents, and when he returned he stated to
the intendant all that had occurred, and requested to know what should
be done with the money and other articles which Humphrey had found.

"I wish you had said nothing to me about it," said the intendant,
"although I am pleased with your open and fair dealing. I can not say
any thing, except that you had better let Humphrey keep it till it is
claimed--which, of course, it never will be. But, Edward, Humphrey must
come over here and make his deposition, as I must report the capture of
these robbers, and send them to trial. You had better go with the clerk
and take the depositions of Pablo and your sisters, while Humphrey
comes here. You can stay till his return. Their depositions are not of
so much consequence as Humphrey's, as they can only speak as to the
attack, but Humphrey's I must take down myself."

When Patience and Clara heard that Edward was going over, they obtained
leave to go with him to see Alice and Edith, and were to be escorted
back by Humphrey. This the intendant consented to, and they had a very
merry party. Humphrey remained two days at the intendant's house, and
then returned to the cottage, where Edward had taken his place during
his absence.




