CHAPTER XXIII.


The next morning, before they had quitted their beds, a messenger
arrived with letters from General Middleton, and from him they found
that the king's army had encamped on the evening before not six miles
from Portlake. As they hastily dressed themselves, Chaloner proposed to
Edward that a little alteration in his dress would be necessary; and
taking him to a wardrobe in which had been put aside some suits of his
own, worn when he was a younger and slighter-made man than he now was,
he requested Edward to make use of them. Edward, who was aware that
Chaloner was right in his proposal, selected two suits of colors which
pleased him most; and dressing in one, and changing his hat for one
more befitting his new attire, was transformed into a handsome
Cavalier. As soon as they had broken their fast they took leave of the
old ladies, and mounting their horses set off for the camp. An hour's
ride brought them to the outposts; and communicating with the officer
on duty, they were conducted by an orderly to the tent of General
Middleton, who received Chaloner with great warmth as an old friend,
and was very courteous to Edward as soon as he heard that he was the
son of Colonel Beverley.

"I have wanted you, Chaloner," said Middleton; "we are raising a troop
of horse; the Duke of Buckingham commands it, but Massey will be the
real leader of it; you have influence in this county, and will, I have
no doubt, bring us many good hands."

"Where is the Earl of Derby?"

"Joined us this morning; we have marched so quick that we have not had
time to pick our adherents up."

"And General Leslie?"

"Is by no means in good spirits: why, I know not. We have too many
ministers with the army, that is certain, and they do harm; but we can
not help ourselves. His majesty must be visible by this time; if you
are ready, I will introduce you; and, when that is done, we will talk
matters over."

General Middleton then walked with them to the house in which the king
had taken up his quarters for the night; and after a few minutes'
waiting in the anteroom, they were admitted into his presence.

"Allow me, your majesty," said General Middleton, after the first
salutations, "to present to you Major Chaloner, whose father's name is
not unknown to you."

"On the contrary, well known to us," replied the king, "as a loyal and
faithful subject whose loss we must deplore. I have no doubt that his
son inherits his courage and his fidelity."

The king held out his hand, and Chaloner bent his knee and kissed it.

"And now, your majesty will be surprised that I should present to you
one of a house supposed to be extinct--the eldest son of Colonel
Beverley."

"Indeed!" replied his majesty; "I heard that all his family perished at
the ruthless burning of Arnwood. I hold myself fortunate, as a king,
that even one son of so loyal and brave a gentleman as Colonel Beverley
has escaped. You are welcome, young sir--most welcome to us; you must
be near us; the very name of Beverley will be pleasing to our ears by
night or day."

Edward knelt down and kissed his majesty's hand, and the king said--

"What can we do for a Beverley? let us know, that we may show our
feelings toward his father's memory."

"All I request is, that your majesty will allow me to be near you in
the hour of danger," replied Edward.

"A right Beverley reply," said the king; "and so we shall see to it,
Middleton."

After a few more courteous words from his majesty, they withdrew, but
General Middleton was recalled by the king for a minute or two to
receive his commands. When he rejoined Edward and Chaloner, he said to
Edward--

"I have orders to send in for his majesty's signature your commission
as captain of horse, and attached to the king's personal staff; it is a
high compliment to the memory of your father, sir, and, I may add, your
own personal appearance. Chaloner will see to your uniforms and
accouterments; you are well mounted, I believe; you have no time to
lose, as we march to-morrow for Warrington, in Cheshire."

"Has any thing been heard of the Parliamentary army?"

"Yes; they are on the march toward London by the Yorkshire road,
intending to cut us off if they can. And now, gentlemen, farewell; for
I have no idle time, I assure you."

Edward was soon equipped, and now attended upon the king. When they
arrived at Warrington, they found a body of horse drawn up to oppose
their passage onward. These were charged, and fled with a trifling
loss; and as they were known to be commanded by Lambert, one of
Cromwell's best generals, there was great exultation in the king's
army; but the fact was, that Lambert had acted upon Cromwell's orders,
which were to harass and delay the march of the king as much as
possible, but not to risk with his small force any thing like an
engagement. After this skirmish it was considered advisable to send
back the Earl of Derby and many other officers of importance into
Lancashire, that they might collect the king's adherents in that
quarter and in Cheshire. Accordingly the earl, with about two hundred
officers and gentlemen, left the army with that intention. It was then
considered that it would be advisable to march the army direct to
London; but the men were so fatigued with the rapidity of the march up
to the present time, and the weather was so warm, that it was decided
in the negative; and as Worcester was a town well affected to the king,
and the country abounded with provisions, it was resolved that the army
should march there, and wait for English re-enforcements. This was
done; the city opened the gates with every mark of satisfaction, and
supplied the army with all that it required. The first bad news which
reached them was the dispersion and defeat of the whole of the Earl of
Derby's party, by a regiment of militia which had surprised them at
Wigan during the night, when they were all asleep, and had no idea that
any enemy was near to them. Although attacked at such disadvantage,
they defended themselves till a large portion of them was killed, and
the remainder were taken prisoners, and most of them brutally put to
death. The Earl of Derby was made a prisoner, but not put to death with
the others.

"This is bad news, Chaloner," said Edward.

"Yes; it is more than bad," replied the latter; "we have lost our best
officers, who never should have left the army; and now the consequences
of the defeat will be, that we shall not have any people come forward
to join us. The winning side is the right side in this world; and there
is more evil than that; the Duke of Buckingham has claimed the command
of the army, which the king has refused, so that we are beginning to
fight among ourselves. General Leslie is evidently dispirited, and
thinks bad of the cause. Middleton is the only man who does his duty.
Depend upon it, we shall have Cromwell upon us before we are aware of
it; and we are in a state of sad confusion: officers quarreling, men
disobedient, much talking, and little doing. Here we have been five
days, and the works which have been proposed to be thrown up as
defenses, not yet begun."

"I can not but admire the patience of the king, with so much to harass
and annoy him."

"He must be patient, perforce," replied Chaloner; "he plays for a
crown, and it is a high stake; but he can not command the minds of men,
although he may the persons. I am no croaker, Beverley, but if we
succeed with this army, as at present disorganized, we shall perform a
miracle."

"We must hope for the best," replied Edward; "common danger may cement
those who would otherwise be asunder; and when they have the army of
Cromwell before them, they may be induced to forget their private
quarrels and jealousies, and unite in the good cause."

"I wish I could be of your opinion, Beverley," replied Chaloner; "but I
have mixed with the world longer than you have, and I think otherwise."

Several more days passed, during which no defenses were thrown up, and
the confusion and quarreling in the army continued to increase, until
at last news arrived that Cromwell was within half a day's march of
them, and that he had collected all the militia on his route, and was
now in numbers nearly double to those in the king's army. All was
amazement and confusion--nothing had been done--no arrangements had
been made--Chaloner told Edward that all was lost if immediate steps
were not taken.

On the 3d of October, the army of Cromwell appeared in sight. Edward
had been on horseback, attending the king, for the best part of the
night; the disposition of the troops had been made as well as it could;
and it was concluded, as Cromwell's army remained quiet, that no
attempt would be made on that day. About noon the king returned to his
lodging, to take some refreshment after his fatigue. Edward was with
him; but before an hour had passed, the alarm came that the armies were
engaged. The king mounted his horse, which was ready saddled at the
door; but before he could ride out of the city, he was met and nearly
beaten back by the whole body almost of his own cavalry, who came
running on with such force that he could not stop them. His majesty
called to several of the officers by name, but they paid no attention;
and so great was the panic, that both the king and his staff, who
attended him, were nearly overthrown, and trampled under foot.

Cromwell had passed a large portion of his troops over the river
without the knowledge of the opponents, and when the attack was made in
so unexpected a quarter, a panic ensued. Where General Middleton and
the Duke Hamilton commanded, a very brave resistance was made; but
Middleton being wounded, Duke Hamilton having his leg taken off by a
round-shot, and many gentlemen having fallen, the troops, deserted by
the remainder of the army, at last gave way, and the rout was general,
the foot throwing away their muskets before they were discharged.

His majesty rode back into the town, and found a body of horse, who had
been persuaded by Chaloner to make a stand. "Follow me," said his
majesty; "we will see what the enemy are about. I do not think they
pursue, and if so, we may yet rally from this foolish panic."

His majesty, followed by Edward, Chaloner, and several of his personal
staff, then galloped out to reconnoiter; but to his mortification he
found that the troops had not followed him, but gone out of the town by
the other gate, and that the enemy's cavalry in pursuit were actually
in the town. Under such circumstances, by the advice of Chaloner and
Edward, his majesty withdrew, and, turning his horse's head, he made
all haste to leave Worcester. After several hours' riding, the king
found himself in company of about 4000 of the cavalry who had so
disgracefully fled; but they were still so panic-struck that he could
put no confidence in them, and having advised with those about him, he
resolved to quit them. This he did without mentioning his intention to
any of his staff, not even Chaloner or Edward--leaving at night with
two of his servants, whom he dismissed as soon as it was daylight,
considering that his chance of escape would be greater if he were quite
alone.

It was not till the next morning that they discovered that the king had
left them, and then they determined to separate, and, as the major
portion were from Scotland, to make what haste they could back to that
country. And now Chaloner and Edward consulted as to their plans.

"It appears to me," said Edward, laughing, "that the danger of this
campaign of ours will consist in getting back again to our own homes,
for I can most safely assert that I have not as yet struck a blow for
the king."

"That is true enough, Beverly. When do you purpose going back to the
New Forest? I think, if you will permit me, I will accompany you," said
Chaloner. "All the pursuit will be to the northward, to intercept and
overtake the retreat into Scotland. I can not therefore go to
Lancashire; and, indeed, as they know that I am out, they will be
looking for me every where."

"Then come with me," said Edward, "I will find you protection till you
can decide what to do. Let us ride on away from this, and we will talk
over the matter as we go; but depend upon it, the further south we get
the safer we shall be, but still not safe, unless we can change our
costume. There will be a strict search for the king to the south, as
they will presume that he will try to get safe to France. Hark! what is
that? I heard the report of arms. Let us ride up this hill and see what
is going on."

They did so, and perceived that there was a skirmish between a party of
Cavaliers and some of the Parliamentary cavalry, at about a quarter of
a mile distant.

"Come, Chaloner, let us at all events have one blow," said Edward.

"Agreed," replied Chaloner, spurring his horse; and down they went at
full speed, and in a minute were in the melee, coming on the rear of
the Parliamentary troops.

This sudden attack from behind decided the affair. The Parliamentary
troopers, thinking that there were more than two coming upon them, made
off after another minute's combat, leaving five or six of their men on
the ground.

"Thanks, Chaloner! thanks, Beverley!" said a voice which they
immediately recognized. It was that of Grenville, one of the king's
pages. "These fellows with me were just about to run, if you had not
come to our aid. I will remain with them no longer, but join you if you
will permit me. At all events, remain here till they go away--I will
send them off."

Grenville then said to the men, "My lads, you must all separate, or
there will be no chance of escape. No more than two should ride
together. Depend upon it, we shall have more of the troops here
directly."

The men, about fifteen in number, who had been in company with
Grenville, considered that Chaloner's advice was good, and without
ceremony set off, with their horses' heads to the northward, leaving
Chaloner, Edward, and Grenville together on the field of the affray.
About a dozen men were lying on the ground, either dead or severely
wounded: seven of them were of the king's party, and the other five of
the Parliamentary troops.

"Now, what I propose," said Edward, "is this: let us do what we can for
those who are wounded, and then strip off the dresses and accouterments
of those Parliamentary dragoons who are dead, and dress ourselves in
them, accouterments and all. We can then pass through the country in
safety, as we shall be supposed to be one of the parties looking for
the king."

"That is a good idea," replied Chaloner, "and the sooner it is done the
better."

"Well," said Edward, wiping his sword, which he still held drawn, and
then sheathing it, "I will take the spoils of this fellow nearest to
me: he fell by my hand, and I am entitled to them by the laws of war
and chivalry; but first, let us dismount and look to the wounded."

They tied their horses to a tree, and having given what assistance they
could to the wounded men, they proceeded to strip three of the
Parliamentary troopers; and then laying aside their own habiliments,
they dressed themselves in the uniform of the enemy, and, mounting
their horses, made all haste from the place. Having gained about twelve
miles, they pulled up their horses, and rode at a more leisurely pace.
It was now eight o'clock in the evening, but still not very dark; they
therefore rode on another five miles, till they came to a small
village, where they dismounted at an ale-house, and put their horses
into the stable.

"We must be insolent and brutal in our manners, or we shall be
suspected."

"Very true," said Grenville, giving the hostler a kick, and telling him
to bestir himself, if he did not want his ears cropped.

They entered the ale-house, and soon found out they were held in great
terror. They ordered every thing of the best to be produced, and
threatened to set fire to the house if it was not; they turned the man
and his wife out of their bed, and all three went to sleep in it; and,
in short, they behaved in such an arbitrary manner, that nobody doubted
that they were Cromwell's horse. In the morning they set off again by
Chaloner's advice, paying for nothing that they had ordered, although
they had all of them plenty of money. They now rode fast, inquiring at
the places which they passed through, whether any fugitives had been
seen, and, if they came to a town, inquiring, before they entered,
whether there were any Parliamentary troops. So well did they manage,
that after four days they had gained the skirts of the New Forest, and
concealed themselves in a thicket till night-time, when Edward proposed
that he should conduct his fellow-travelers to the cottage, where he
would leave them till his plans were adjusted.

Edward had already arranged his plans. His great object was to ward off
any suspicion of where he had been, and, of course, any idea that the
intendant had been a party to his acts; and the fortunate change of his
dress enabled him now to do so with success. He had decided to conduct
his two friends to the cottage that night, and the next morning to ride
over in his Parliamentary costume to the intendant's house, and bring
the first news of the success of Cromwell and the defeat at Worcester;
by which stratagem it would appear as if he had been with the
Parliamentary, and not with the Jacobite, army.

As they had traveled along, they found that the news of Cromwell's
success had not yet arrived: in those times there was not the rapidity
of communication that we now have, and Edward thought it very probable
that he would be the first to communicate the intelligence to the
intendant and those who resided near him.

As soon as it was dusk the three travelers left their retreat, and,
guided by Edward, soon arrived at the cottage. Their appearance at
first created no little consternation, for Humphrey and Pablo happened
to be in the yard, when they heard the clattering of the swords and
accouterments, and through the gloom observed, as they advanced, that
the party were troopers. At first, Humphrey was for running on and
barring the door; but, on a second reflection, he felt that he could
not do a more imprudent thing if there was danger; and he therefore
contented himself with hastily imparting the intelligence to his
sisters, and then remaining at the threshold to meet the coming of the
parties. The voice of Edward calling him by name dissipated all alarm,
and in another minute he was in the arms of his brother and sisters.

"First, let us take our horses to the stables, Humphrey," said Edward,
after the first greeting was over, "and then we will come and partake
of any thing that Alice can prepare for us, for we have not fared over
well for the last three days."

Accompanied by Humphrey and Pablo, they all went to the stables, and
turned out the ponies to make room for the horses; and as soon as they
were all fed and littered down, they returned to the cottage, and
Chaloner and Grenville were introduced. Supper was soon on the table,
and they were too hungry to talk while they were eating, so that but
little information was gleaned from them that night. However, Humphrey
ascertained that all was lost, and that they had escaped from the field
previous to Alice and Edith leaving the room to prepare beds for the
new-comers. When the beds were ready, Chaloner and Grenville retired,
and then Edward remained half an hour with Humphrey, to communicate to
him what had passed. Of course he could not enter into detail; but told
him that he would get information from their new guests after he had
left, which he must do early in the morning.

"And now, Humphrey, my advice is this. My two friends can not remain in
this cottage, for many reasons; but we have the key of Clara's cottage,
and they can take up their lodging there, and we can supply them with
all they want, until they find means of going abroad, which is their
intention. I must be off to the intendant's to-morrow, and the day
after I will come over to you. In the mean time, our guests can remain
here, while you and Pablo prepare the cottage for them; and when I
return every thing shall be settled, and we will conduct them to it. I
do not think there is much danger of their being discovered while they
remain there, certainly not so much as if they were here; for we must
expect parties of troops in every direction now, as they were when the
king's father made his escape from Hampton Court. And now to bed, my
good brother; and call me early, for I much fear that I shall not wake
up if you do not."

The brothers then parted for the night.

The next morning, long before their guests were awake, Edward had been
called by Humphrey, and found Pablo at the door with his horse. Edward,
who had put on his Parliamentary accouterments, bade a hasty farewell
to them, and set off across the forest to the house of the intendant,
where he arrived before they had left their bedrooms. The first person
he encountered was, very fortunately, Oswald, who was at his cottage
door. Edward beckoned to him, being then about one hundred yards off;
but Oswald did not recognize him at first, and advanced toward him in a
very leisurely manner, to ascertain what the trooper might wish to
inquire. But Edward called him Oswald, and that was sufficient. In a
few words Edward told him how all was lost, and how he had escaped by
changing clothes with one of the enemy.

"I am now come to bring the news to the intendant, Oswald. You
understand me, of course?"

"Of course I do, Master Edward, and will take care that it is well
known that you have been fighting by the side of Cromwell all this
time. I should recommend you to show yourself in this dress for the
remainder of the day, and then every one will be satisfied. Shall I go
to the intendant's before you?"

"No, no, Oswald; the intendant does not require me to be introduced to
him, of course. I must now gallop up to his house and announce myself.
Farewell for the present--I shall see you during the day."

Edward put spurs to his horse, and arrived at the intendant's at full
speed, making no small clattering in the yard below as he went in, much
to the surprise of Sampson, who came out to ascertain what was the
cause, and who was not a little surprised at perceiving Edward, who
threw himself off the horse, and desiring Sampson to take it to the
stable, entered the kitchen, and disturbed Phoebe, who was preparing
breakfast. Without speaking to her, Edward passed on to the intendant's
room, and knocked.

"Who is there?" said the intendant.

"Edward Armitage," was the reply; and the door was opened. The
intendant started back at the sight of Edward in the trooper's costume.

"My dear Edward, I am glad to see you in any dress, but this requires
explanation. Sit down and tell me all."

"All is soon told, sir," replied Edward, taking off his iron skull-cap,
and allowing his hair to fall down on his shoulders.

He then, in a few words, stated what had happened, and by what means he
had escaped, and the reason why he had kept on the trooper's
accouterments, and made his appearance in them.

"You have done very prudently," replied the intendant, "and you have
probably saved me; at all events, you have warded off all suspicion,
and those who are spies upon me will now have nothing to report, except
to my favor. Your absence has been commented upon, and made known at
high quarters, and suspicion has arisen in consequence. Your return as
one of the Parliamentary forces will now put an end to all ill-natured
remarks. My dear Edward, you have done me a service. As my secretary,
and having been known to have been a follower of the Beverleys, your
absence was considered strange, and it was intimated at high quarters
that you had gone to join the king's forces, and that with my knowledge
and consent. This I have from Langton; and it has in consequence
injured me not a little: but now your appearance will make all right
again. Now we will first to prayers, and then to breakfast; and after
that we will have a more detailed account of what has taken place since
your departure. Patience and Clara will not be sorry to recover their
companion; but how they will like you in that dress I can not pretend
to say. However, I thank God that you have returned safe to us; and I
shall be most happy to see you once more attend in the more peaceful
garb of a secretary."

"I will, with your permission, sir, not quit this costume for one day,
as it may be as well that I should be seen in it."

"You are right, Edward: for this day retain it; to-morrow you will
resume your usual costume. Go down to the parlor; you will find
Patience and Clara anxiously waiting for you, I have no doubt. I will
join you there in ten minutes."

Edward left the room, and went down stairs. It hardly need be said how
joyfully he was received by Patience and Clara. The former, however,
expressed her joy in tears--the latter, in wild mirth.

We will pass over the explanations and the narrative of what had
occurred, which was given by Edward to Mr. Heatherstone in his own
room. The intendant said, as he concluded.

"Edward, you must now perceive that, for the present, nothing more can
be done; if it pleases the Lord, the time will come when the monarch
will be reseated on his throne; at present, we must bow to the powers
that be; and I tell you frankly, it is my opinion that Cromwell aims at
sovereignty and will obtain it. Perhaps it may be better that we should
suffer the infliction for a time, as for a time only can it be upheld,
and it may be the cause of the king being more schooled and more fitted
to reign than, by what you have told me in the course of your
narrative, he at present appears to be."

"Perhaps so, sir," replied Edward. "I must say that the short campaign
I have gone through has very much opened my eyes. I have seen but
little true chivalric feeling, and much of interested motives, in those
who have joined the king's forces. The army collected was composed of
most discordant elements, and were so discontented, so full of jealousy
and ill-will, that I am not surprised at the result. One thing is
certain, that there must be a much better feeling existing between all
parties before such a man as Cromwell can ever be moved from his
position; and, for the present, the cause may be considered as lost."

"You are right, Edward," replied the intendant; "I would they were
better, but as they are, let us make the best of them. You have now
seen enough to have subdued that fiery zeal for the cause which
previously occupied your whole thoughts; now let us be prudent, and try
if we can not be happy."




