CHAPTER XXIV.


It was only to Oswald that Edward made known what had occurred; he knew
that he was to be trusted. The next day, Edward resumed his forester's
dress, while another one was preparing for him, and went over to the
cottage, where, with the consent of the intendant, he proposed
remaining for a few days. Of course, Edward had not failed to acquaint
the intendant with his proposed plans relative to Chaloner and
Grenville, and received his consent; at the same time advising that
they should gain the other side of the Channel as soon as they possibly
could. Edward found them all very anxious for his arrival. Humphrey and
Pablo had been to the cottage, which they had found undisturbed since
the capture of the robbers, and made every thing ready for the
reception of the two Cavaliers, as, on their first journey, they took
with them a cart-load of what they knew would be necessary. Chaloner
and Grenville appeared to be quite at home already, and not very
willing to shift their quarters. They, of course, still retained their
troopers' clothes, as they had no other to wear until they could be
procured from Lymington; but, as we have before mentioned, they were in
no want of money. They had been amusing the girls and Humphrey with a
description of what had occurred during the campaign, and Edward found
that he had but little to tell them, as Chaloner had commenced his
narrative with an account of his first meeting with Edward when he had
been attacked by the highwaymen. As soon as he could get away, Edward
went out with Humphrey to have some conversation with him.

"Now, Humphrey, as you have pretty well heard all my adventures since
our separation, let me hear what you have been doing."

"I have no such tales of stirring interest to narrate as Chaloner has
been doing as your deputy, Edward," replied Humphrey. "All I can say
is, that we have had no visitors--that we have longed for your
return--and that we have not been idle since you quitted us."

"What horses were those in the stable," said Ed ward, "that you turned
out to make room for ours when we arrived?"

Humphrey laughed, and then informed Edward of the manner in which they
had succeeded in capturing them.

"Well, you really deserve credit, Humphrey, and certainly were not born
to be secluded in this forest."

"I rather think that I have found that I was born for it," replied
Humphrey, "although, I must confess, that since you have quitted us, I
have not felt so contented here as I did before. You have returned, and
you have no idea what an alteration I see in you since you have mixed
with the world, and have been a party in such stirring scenes."

"Perhaps so, Humphrey," replied Edward; "and yet do you know, that,
although I so ardently wished to mix with the world, and to follow the
wars, I am any thing but satisfied with what I have seen of it; and so
far from feeling any inclination to return to it, I rather feel more
inclined to remain here, and remain in quiet and in peace. I have been
disappointed, that is the truth. There is a great difference between
the world such as we fancy it when we are pining for it, and the world
when we actually are placed within the vortex, and perceive the secret
springs of men's actions. I have gained a lesson, but not a
satisfactory one, Humphrey; it may be told in a very few words. It is a
most deceitful and hollow world! and that is all said in a few words."

"What very agreeable, pleasant young men are Master Chaloner and
Grenville," observed Humphrey.

"Chaloner I know well," replied Edward; "he is to be trusted, and he is
the only one in whom I have been able to place confidence, and
therefore I was most fortunate in falling in with him as I did on my
first starting. Grenville, I know little about; we met often, it is
true, but it was in the presence of the king, being both of us on his
staff; at the same time, I must acknowledge that I know nothing against
him; and this I do know, which is, that he is brave."

Edward then narrated what had passed between the intendant and him
since his return; and how well satisfied the intendant had been with
his ruse in returning to him in the dress of a trooper.

"Talking about that, Edward, do you not think it likely that we shall
have the troopers down here in search of the king?"

"I wonder you have not had them already," replied Edward.

"And what shall we do if they arrive?"

"That is all prepared for," replied Edward; "although, till you
mentioned it, I had quite forgotten it. The intendant was talking with
me on the subject last night, and here is an appointment for you as
verderer, signed by him, which you are to use as you may find
necessary; and here is another missive, ordering you to receive into
your house two of the troopers who may be sent down here, and find them
quarters and victuals, but not to be compelled to receive more. Until
the search is over, Chaloner and Grenville must retain their
accouterments and remain with us. And, Humphrey, if you have not made
any use of the clothes which I left here--I mean the first dress I had
made when I was appointed secretary, and which I thought rather too
faded to wear any longer--I will put it on now, as should any military
come here as scouters to the intendant, I shall have some authority
over them."

"It is in your chest, where you left it, Edward. The girls did propose
to make two josephs out of it for winter wear, but they never have
thought of it since, or have not had time. By-the-by, you have not told
me what you think of Alice and Edith after your long absence."

"I think they are both very much grown and very much improved," replied
Edward; "but I must confess to you that I think it is high time that
they were, if possible, removed from their present homely occupations,
and instructed as young ladies should be."

"But how, Edward, is that to be?"

"That I can not yet tell, and it grieves me that I can not; but still I
see the necessity of it, if ever we are to return to our position in
society."

"And are we ever to return?"

"I don't know. I thought little of it before I went away and mixed in
society; but since I have been in the world, I have been compelled to
feel that my dear sisters are not in their sphere, and I have resolved
upon trying if I can not find a more suitable position for them. Had we
been successful I should have had no difficulty, but now I hardly know
what to do."

"I have not inquired about Mistress Patience, brother; how is she?"

"She is as good and as handsome as ever, and very much grown; indeed,
she is becoming quite womanly."

"And Clara?"

"Oh, I do not perceive any difference in her: I think she is grown, but
I hardly observed her. Here comes Chaloner; we will tell him of our
arrangements in case we are disturbed by the military parties."

"It is a most excellent arrangement," said Chaloner, when Edward had
made the communication; "and it was a lucky day when I first fell in
with you, Beverley."

"Not Beverley, I pray you; that name is to be forgotten; it was only
revived for the occasion."

"Very true; then, Master Secretary Armitage, I think the arrangement
excellent: the only point will be to find out what troops are sent down
in this direction, as we must of course belong to some other regiment,
and have been pursued from the field of battle. I should think that
Lambert's squadrons will not be this way."

"We will soon ascertain that; let your horses be saddled and
accoutered, so that should any of them make their appearance, the
horses may be at the door. It is my opinion that they will be here some
time to-day."

"I fear that it will be almost impossible for the king to escape,"
observed Chaloner. "I hardly know what to think of his leaving us in
that way."

"I have reflected upon it," replied Edward, "and I think it was perhaps
prudent: some were to be trusted and some not; it was impossible to
know who were and who were not--he therefore trusted nobody. Besides,
his chance of escape, if quite alone, is greater than if in company."

"And yet I feel a little mortified that he did not trust me," continued
Edward; "my life was at his service."

"He could no more read your heart, than he could mine or others,"
observed Chaloner; "and any selection would have been invidious: on the
whole, I think he acted wisely, and I trust that it will prove so. One
thing is certain, which is, that all is over now, and that for a long
while we may let our swords rest in their scabbards. Indeed, I am
sickened with it, after what I have seen, and would gladly live here
with you, and help to till the land, away from the world and all its
vexations. What say you, Edward; will you and your brother take me as a
laborer till all is quiet again?"

"You would soon tire of it, Chaloner; you were made for active exertion
and bustling in the world."

"Nevertheless, I think, under two such amiable and pretty mistresses, I
could stay well contented here; it is almost Arcadian. But still it is
selfish for me to talk in this way; indeed, my feelings are contrary to
my words."

"How do you mean, Chaloner?"

"To be candid with you, Edward, I was thinking what a pity it is that
two such sweet girls as your sisters should be employed here in
domestic drudgery, and remain in such an uncultivated state--if I may
be pardoned for speaking so freely--but I do so because I am convinced
that, if in proper hands, they would grace a court; and you must feel
that I am right."

"Do you not think that the same feelings have passed in my mind,
Chaloner? Indeed, Humphrey will tell you that we were speaking on the
same subject but an hour ago. You must, however, be aware of the
difficulty I am in: were I in possession of Arnwood and its domain,
then indeed--but that is all over now, and I presume I shall shortly
see my own property, whose woods are now in sight of me, made over to
some Roundhead, for good services against the Cavaliers at Worcester."

"Edward," replied Chaloner, "I have this to say to you, and I can say
it because you know that I am indebted to you for my life, and that is
a debt that nothing can cancel: if at any time you determine upon
removing your sisters from this, recollect my maiden aunts at Portlake.
They can not be in better hands, and they can not be in the hands of
any person who will more religiously do their duty toward them, and be
pleased with the trust confided to them. They are rich, in spite of
exactions; but in these times, women are not fined and plundered as men
are; and they have been well able to afford all that has been taken
from them, and all that they have voluntarily given to the assistance
of our party. They are alone, and I really believe that nothing would
make them more happy than to have the care of the two sisters of Edward
Beverley--be sure of that. But I will be more sure of it if you will
find means of sending to them a letter which I shall write to them. I
tell you that you will do them a favor, and that if you do not accept
the offer, you will sacrifice your sisters' welfare to your own
pride--which I do not think you would do."

"Most certainly I will not do that," replied Edward; "and I am fully
sensible of your kind offer; but I can say no more until I hear what
your good aunts may reply to your letter. You mistake me much,
Chaloner, if you think that any sense of obligation would prevent me
from seeing my sisters removed from a position so unworthy of them, but
which circumstances have driven them to. That we are paupers, is
undeniable, but I never shall forgot that my sisters are the daughters
of Colonel Beverley."

"I am delighted with your reply, Edward, and I fear not that of my good
aunts. It will be a great happiness to me when I am wandering abroad to
know that your sisters are under their roof, and are being educated as
they ought to be."

"What's the matter, Pablo?" said Humphrey to the former, who came
running, out of breath.

"Soldiers," said Pablo, "plenty of them, gallop this way--gallop every
way."

"Now, Chaloner, we must get ourselves out of this scrape, and I trust
that afterward all be well," said Edward. "Bring the horses out to the
door; and, Chaloner, you and Grenville must wait within; bring my horse
out also, as it will appear as if I had just ridden over. I must in to
change my dress. Humphrey, keep a look-out and let us know when they
come."

Chaloner and Edward went in, and Edward put on his dress of secretary.
Shortly afterward, a party of Roundhead cavalry were seen galloping
toward the cottage. They soon arrived there, and pulled up their
horses. An officer who headed them addressed Humphrey in a haughty
tone, and asked him who he was.

"I am one of the verderers of the forest, sir," replied Humphrey,
respectfully.

"And whose cottage is that? and who have you there?"

"The cottage is mine, sir; two of the horses at the door belong to two
troopers who have come in quest of those who fled from Worcester, the
other horse belongs to the secretary of the intendant of the forest,
Master Heatherstone, who has come over with directions from the
intendant as to the capture of the rebels."

At this moment, Edward came out and saluted the officer.

"This is the secretary, sir, Master Armitage," said Humphrey, falling
back.

Edward again saluted the officer, and said--

"Master Heatherstone, the intendant, has sent me over here to make
arrangements for the capture of the rebels. This man is ordered to
lodge two troopers as long as they are considered necessary to remain;
and I have directions to tell any officer whom I may meet, that Master
Heatherstone and his verderers will take good care that none of the
rebels are harbored in this direction; and that it will be better that
the troops scour the southern edge of the forest, as it is certain that
the fugitives will try all that they can to embark for France."

"What regiment do the troopers belong to that you have here?"

"I believe to Lambert's troop, sir; but they shall come out and answer
for themselves. Tell those men to come out," said Edward to Humphrey.

"Yes, sir, but they are hard to wake, for they have ridden from
Worcester; but I will rouse them."

"Nay, I can not wait," replied the officer. "I know none of Lambert's
troops, and they have no information to give."

"Could you not take them with you, sir, and leave two of your men
instead of them; for they are troublesome people to a poor man, and
devour every thing?" said Humphrey, submissively.

"No, no," replied the officer, laughing, "we all know Lambert's
people--a friend or enemy is much the same to them. I have no power
over them, and you must make the best of it. Forward! men," continued
the officer, saluting Edward as he passed on; and in a minute or two
they were far away.

"That's well over," observed Edward. "Chaloner and Grenville are too
young-looking and too good-looking for Lambert's villains; and a sight
of them might have occasioned suspicion. We must, however, expect more
visits. Keep a good look-out, Pablo."

Edward and Humphrey then went in and joined the party inside the
cottage, who were in a state of no little suspense during the colloquy
outside.

"Why, Alice, dearest! you look quite pale!" said Edward, as he came in.

"I feared for our guests, Edward. I'm sure that if they had come into
the cottage, Master Chaloner and Master Grenville would never have been
believed to be troopers."

"We thank you for the compliment, Mistress Alice," said Chaloner; "but
I think, if necessary, I could ruffle and swear with the best, or
rather the worst of them. We passed for troopers very well on the road
here."

"Yes, but you did not meet any other troopers."

"That's very true, and shows your penetration. I must acknowledge that,
with troopers, there would have been more difficulty; but still, among
so many thousands, there must be many varieties, and it would be an
awkward thing for an officer of one troop to arrest upon suspicion the
men belonging to another. I think when we are visited again I shall
sham intoxication--that will not be very suspicious."

"No, not on either side," replied Edward. "Come, Alice, we will eat
what dinner you may have ready for us."

For three or four days the Parliamentary forces continued to scour the
forest, and another visit or two was paid to the cottage, but without
suspicion being created, in consequence of the presence of Edward and
his explanations. The parties were invariably sent in another
direction. Edward wrote to the intendant, informing him what had
occurred, and requesting permission to remain a few days longer at the
cottage; and Pablo, who took the letter, returned with one from the
intendant, acquainting him that the king had not yet been taken; and
requesting the utmost vigilance on his part to insure his capture, with
directions to search various places, in company with the troopers who
had been stationed at the cottage; or, if he did not like to leave the
cottage, to shew the letter to any officer commanding parties in
search, that they might act upon the suggestions contained in it. This
letter Edward had an opportunity of showing to one or two officers,
commanding parties, who approached the cottage, and to whom Edward went
out to communicate with, thereby preventing their stopping there.

At last, in about a fortnight, there was not a party in the forest; all
of them having gone down to the seaside, to look out for the fugitives,
several of whom were taken.

Humphrey took the cart to Lymington, to procure clothes for Chaloner
and Grenville, and it was decided that they should assume those of
verderers of the forest, which would enable them to carry a gun. As
soon as Humphrey had obtained what was requisite, Chaloner and
Grenville were conducted to Clara's cottage, and took possession, of
course never showing themselves outside the wood which surrounded it.
Humphrey lent them Holdfast as a watch, and they took leave of Alice
and Edith with much regret. Humphrey and Edward accompanied them to
their new abode. It was arranged that the horses should remain under
the care of Humphrey, as they had no stable at Clara's cottage.

On parting, Chaloner gave Edward the letter for his aunts; and then
Edward once more bent his steps toward the intendant's house, and found
himself in the company of Patience and Clara.

Edward narrated to the intendant all that had occurred, and the
intendant approved of what he had done, strongly advising that Chaloner
and Grenville should not attempt to go to the Continent till all
pursuit was over.

"Here's a letter I have received from the government, Edward, highly
commending my vigilance and activity in pursuit of the fugitives. It
appears that the officers you fell in with have written up to state
what admirable dispositions we had made. It is a pity, is it not,
Edward, that we are compelled to be thus deceitful in this world?
Nothing but the times, and the wish to do good, could warrant it. We
meet the wicked, and fight them with their own weapons; but although it
is treating them as they deserve, our conscience must tell us that it
is not right."

"Surely, sir, to save the lives of people who have committed no other
fault except loyalty to their king, will warrant our so doing--at
least, I hope so."

"According to the Scriptures, I fear it will not, but it is a
difficult, question for us to decide. Let us be guided by our own
consciences; if they do not reproach us, we can not be far from right."

Edward then produced the letter he had received from Chaloner,
requesting that the intendant would have the kindness to forward it.

"I see," replied the intendant; "I can forward these through Langton. I
presume it is to obtain credit for money. It shall go on Thursday."

The conference was then broken up, and Edward went to see Oswald.




