CHAPTER XXVII.


But we must follow Edward for a time. On his arrival at Paris, he was
kindly received by King Charles, who promised to assist his views in
joining the army.

"You have to choose between two generals, both great in the art of
war--Conde and Turenne. I have no doubt that they will be opposed to
each other soon--that will be the better for you, as you will learn
tactics from such great players."

"Which would your majesty recommend me to follow?" inquired Edward.

"Conde is my favorite, and he will soon be opposed to this truculent
and dishonest court, who have kept me here as an instrument to
accomplish their own wishes, but who have never intended to keep their
promises, and place me on the English throne. I will give you letters
to Conde; and, recollect that whatever general you take service under,
you will follow him without pretending to calculate how far his
movements may be right or wrong--that is not your affair. Conde is just
now released from Vincennes, but depend upon it he will be in arms very
soon."

As soon as he was furnished with the necessary credentials from the
king, Edward presented himself at the levee of the Prince of Conde.

"You are here highly spoken of," said the prince, "for so young a man.
So you were at the affair of Worcester? We will retain you, for your
services will be wanted by-and-by. Can you procure any of your
countrymen?"

"I know but of two that I can recommend from personal knowledge; but
these two officers I can venture to pledge myself for."

"Any more?"

"That I can not at present reply to your highness; but I should think
it very possible."

"Bring me the officers to-morrow at this hour, Monsieur Beverley--_au
revoir_."

The Prince of Conde then passed on to speak to other officers and
gentlemen who were waiting to pay their respects. Edward went to
Chaloner and Grenville, who were delighted with the intelligence which
he brought them. The next day they were at the prince's levee, and
introduced by Edward.

"I am fortunate, gentlemen," said the prince, "in securing the services
of such fine young men. You will oblige me by enlisting as many of your
countrymen as you may consider likely to do good service, and then
follow me to Guienne, to which province I am now about to depart. Be
pleased to put yourself into communication with the parties named in
this paper, and after my absence you will receive from them every
assistance and necessary supplies which may be required."

A month after this interview, Conde, who had been joined by a great
number of nobles, and had been re-enforced by troops from Spain, set up
the standard of revolt. Edward and his friends joined them, with about
three hundred English and Scotchmen, which they had enlisted, and very
soon afterward Conde obtained the victory at Blenan, and in April,
1652, advanced to Paris. Turenne, who had taken the command of the
French army, followed him, and a severe action was fought in the
streets of the suburb of St. Antoine, in which neither party had the
advantage. But eventually Conde was beaten back by the superior force
of Turenne; and, not receiving the assistance he expected from the
Spaniards, he fell back to the frontiers of Champagne.

Previous to his departure from Paris, Edward had received Humphrey's
letter, explaining away the intendant's conduct; and the contents
removed a heavy load from Edward's mind; but he now thought of nothing
but war, and although he cherished the idea of Patience Heatherstone,
he was resolved to follow the fortunes of the prince as long as he
could. He wrote a letter to the intendant, thanking him for his kind
feelings and intentions toward him, and he trusted that he might one
day have the pleasure of seeing him again. He did not however think it
advisable to mention the name of his daughter, except in inquiring
after her health, and sending his respects. "It may be years before I
see her again," thought Edward, "and who knows what may happen?"

The Prince of Conde now had the command of the Spanish forces in the
Netherlands; and Edward, with his friends, followed his fortunes, and
gained his good-will: they were rapidly promoted.

Time flew on, and in the year 1654 the court of France concluded an
alliance with Cromwell, and expelled King Charles from the French
frontiers. The war was still carried on in the Netherlands. Turenne
bore down Conde, who had gained every campaign; and the court of Spain,
wearied with reverses, made overtures of peace, which was gladly
accepted by the French.

During these wars, Cromwell had been named Protector, and had shortly
afterward died.

Edward, who but rarely heard from Humphrey, was now anxious to quit the
army and go to the king, who was in Spain; but to leave his colors,
while things were adverse, was impossible.

After the peace and the pardon of Conde by the French king, the armies
were disbanded, and the three adventurers were free. They took their
leave of the prince, who thanked them for their long and meritorious
services; and they then hastened to King Charles, who had left Spain
and come to the Low Countries. At the time of their joining the king,
Richard, the son of Cromwell, who had been nominated Protector, had
resigned, and every thing was ready for the Restoration.

On the 15th of May, 1660, the news arrived that Charles had been
proclaimed king on the 8th, and a large body of gentlemen went to
invite him over. The king sailed from Scheveling, was met at Dover by
General Monk, and conducted to London, which he entered amid the
acclamations of the people, on the 29th of the same month.

We may leave the reader to suppose that Edward, Chaloner, and Grenville
were among the most favored of those in his train. As the procession
moved slowly along the Strand, through a countless multitude, the
windows of all the houses were filled with well-dressed ladies, who
waved their white kerchiefs to the king and his attendant suit.
Chaloner, Edward, and Grenville, who rode side by side as gentlemen in
waiting, were certainly the most distinguished among the king's retinue.

"Look, Edward," said Chaloner, "at those lovely girls at yon window. Do
you recognize them?"

"Indeed I do not. Are they any of our Paris beauties?"

"Why, thou insensible and unnatural animal! they are thy sisters, Alice
and Edith; and do you not recognize behind them my good aunts
Conynghame?"

"It is so, I believe," replied Edward. "Yes, now that Edith smiles, I'm
sure it is them."

"Yes," replied Grenville, "there can be no doubt of that; but will
they, think you, recognize us?"

"We shall see," replied Edward, as they now approached within a few
yards of the window; for while they had been speaking the procession
had stopped.

"Is it possible," thought Edward, "that these can be the two girls in
russet gowns, that I left at the cottage? And yet it must be. Well,
Chaloner, to all appearance, your good aunts have done justice to their
charge."

"Nature has done more, Edward. I never thought that they would have
grown into such lovely girls as they have, although I always thought
that they were handsome."

As they passed, Edward caught the eye of Edith, and smiled.

"Alice, that's Edward!" said Edith, so loud, as to be heard by the
king, and all near him.

Alice and Edith rose and waved their handkerchiefs, but they were soon
obliged to cease, and put them to their eyes.

"Are those your sisters, Edward?" said the king.

"They are, your majesty."

The king rose in his stirrups, and made a low obeisance to the window
where they were standing.

"We shall have some court beauties, Beverley," said the king, looking
at him over his shoulder.

As soon as the ceremonies were over, and they could escape from their
personal attentions, Edward and his two friends went to the house in
which resided the Ladies Conynghame and his sisters.

We pass over the joy of this meeting after so many years' absence, and
the pleasure which it gave to Edward to find his sisters grown such
accomplished and elegant young women. That his two friends, who were,
as the reader will recollect, old acquaintances of Alice and Edith,
were warmly received, we hardly need say.

"Now, Edward, who do you think was here to-day--the reigning belle, and
the toast of all the gentlemen?"

"Indeed! I must be careful of my heart. Dear Edith, who is she?"

"No less than one with whom you were formerly well acquainted,
Edward--Patience Heatherstone."

"Patience Heatherstone," cried Edward, "the toast of all London!"

"Yes; and deservedly so, I can assure you; but she is as good as she is
handsome, and, moreover, treats all the gay gallants with perfect
indifference. She is staying with her uncle, Sir Ashley Cooper; and her
father is also in town, for he called here with her to-day."

"When did you hear from Humphrey, Edith?"

"A few days back. He has left the cottage now, altogether."

"Indeed? Where does he reside then?"

"At Arnwood. The house has been rebuilt, and I understand is a very
princely mansion. Humphrey has charge of it until it is ascertained to
whom it is to belong."

"It belongs to Mr. Heatherstone, does it not?" replied Edward.

"How can you say so, Edward! You received Humphrey's letters a long
while ago."

"Yes, I did; but let us not talk about it any more, my dear Edith. I am
in great perplexity."

"Nay, dear brother, let us talk about it," said Alice, who had come up
and overheard the latter portion of the conversation. "What is your
perplexity?"

"Well," replied Edward, "since it is to be so, let us sit down and talk
over the matter. I acknowledge the kindness of Mr. Heatherstone, and
feel that all he asserted to Humphrey is true: still I do not like that
I should be indebted to him for a property which is mine, and that he
has no right to give. I acknowledge his generosity, but I do not
acknowledge his right of possession. Nay, much as I admire, and I may
say, fond as I am (for time has not effaced the feeling) of his
daughter, it still appears to me that, although not said, it is
expected that she is to be included in the transfer; and I will accept
no wife on such conditions."

"That is to say, because all you wish for, your property and a woman
you love, are offered you in one lot, you will not accept them; they
must be divided, and handed over to you in two!" said Alice, smiling.

"You mistake, dearest; I am not so foolish; but I have a certain pride,
which you can not blame. Accepting the property from Mr. Heatherstone
is receiving a favor were it given as a marriage portion with his
daughter. Now, why should I accept as a favor what I can claim as a
right! It is my intention of appealing to the king and demanding the
restoration of my property. He can not refuse it."

"Put not your trust in princes, brother," replied Alice. "I doubt if
the king, or his council, will consider it advisable to make so many
discontented as to restore property which has been so long held by
others, and by so doing create a host of enemies. Recollect also that
Mr. Heatherstone, and his brother-in-law, Sir Ashley Cooper, have done
the king much more service than you ever have or can do. They have been
most important agents in his restoration, and the king's obligations to
them are much greater than they are to you. Besides, merely for what
may be called a point of honor, for it is no more, in what an
unpleasant situation will you put his majesty! At all events, Edward,
recollect you do not know what are the intentions of Mr. Heatherstone;
wait and see what he proffers first."

"But, my dear sister, it appears to me that his intentions are evident.
Why has he rebuilt Arnwood? He is not going to surrender my property
and make me a present of the house."

"The reason for rebuilding the mansion was good. You were at the wars;
it was possible that you might, or might not return. He said this to
Humphrey, who has all along been acting as his factotum in the
business; and recollect, at the time that Mr. Heatherstone commenced
the rebuilding of the mansion, what prospect was there of the
restoration of the king, or of your ever being in a position to apply
for the restoration of your property! I believe, however, that Humphrey
knows more of Mr. Heatherstone's intentions than he has made known to
us; and I therefore say again, my dear Edward, make no application till
you ascertain what Mr. Heatherstone's intentions may be."

"Your advice is good, my dear Alice, and I will be guided by it,"
replied Edward.

"And now let me give you some advice for your friends, Masters Chaloner
and Grenville. That much of their property has been taken away and put
into other hands, I know; and probably they expect it will be restored
upon their application to the king. Those who hold the property think
so too, and so far it is fortunate. Now, from wiser heads than mine, I
have been told that these applications will not be acceded to, HM is
supposed; but, at the same time, if they were to meet the parties, and
close with them at once, before the king's intentions are known, they
would recover their property at a third or a quarter of the value. Now
is their time: even a few days' delay may make a difference. They can
easily obtain a delay for the payment of the moneys. Impress that upon
them, my dear Edward, and let them, if possible, be off to their
estates to-morrow and make the arrangements."

"That is advice which must be followed," replied Edward. "We must go
now, and I will not fail to communicate it to them this very night."

We may as well here inform the reader that the advice was immediately
acted upon, and that Chaloner and Grenville recovered all their estates
at about five years' purchase.

Edward remained at court several days. He had written to Humphrey, and
had dispatched a messenger with the letter; but the messenger had not
yet returned. The court was now one continual scene of fetes and
gayety. On the following day a drawing-room was to be held, and
Edward's sisters were to be presented. Edward was standing, with many
others of the suit, behind the chair of the king, amusing himself with
the presentations as they took place, and waiting for the arrival of
his sisters--Chaloner and Grenville were not with him, they had
obtained leave to go into the country, for the object we have before
referred to--when his eyes caught, advancing toward the king, Mr.
Heatherstone, who led his daughter, Patience. That they had not
perceived him was evident; indeed her eyes were not raised once, from
the natural timidity felt by a young woman in the presence of royalty.
Edward half concealed himself behind one of his companions that he
might gaze upon her without reserve. She was indeed a lovely young
person, but little altered, except having grown taller and more rounded
and perfect in her figure; and her court-dress displayed proportions
which her humble costume at the New Forest had concealed, or which time
had not matured. There was the same pensive, sweet expression in her
face, which had altered little; but the beautiful rounded arms, the
symmetrical fall of the shoulders, and the proportion of the whole
figure was a surprise to him; and Edward, in his own mind, agreed that
she might well be the reigning toast of the day.

Mr. Heatherstone advanced and made his obeisance, and then his daughter
was led forward, and introduced by a lady unknown to Edward. After he
had saluted her, the king said, loud enough for Edward to hear,

"My obligations to your father are great. I trust that the daughter
will often grace our court."

Patience made no reply, but passed on; and, soon afterward, Edward lost
sight of her in the crowd.

If there ever had been any check to Edward's feelings toward
Patience--and time and absence have their effect upon the most ardent
of lovers--the sight of her so resplendent in beauty acted upon him
like magic; and he was uneasy till the ceremony was over and he was
enabled to go to his sisters.

When he entered the room, he found himself in the arms of Humphrey, who
had arrived with the messenger. After the greetings were over, Edward
said,

"Alice and I have seen Patience, and I fear I must surrender at
discretion. Mr. Heatherstone may make his own terms; I must wave all
pride rather than lose her. I thought that I had more control over
myself; but I have seen her, and feel that my future happiness depends
upon obtaining her as a wife. Let her father but give me her, and
Arnwood will be but a trifle in addition!"

"With respect to the conditions upon which you are to possess Arnwood,"
said Humphrey, "I can inform you what they are. They are wholly
unshackled, further than that you are to repay by installments the
money expended in the building of the house. This I am empowered to
state to you, and I think you will allow that Mr. Heatherstone has
fully acted up to what he stated were his views when he first obtained
a grant of the property."

"He has, indeed," replied Edward.

"As for his daughter, Edward, you have yet to 'win her and wear her,'
as the saying is. Her father will resign the property to you as yours
by right, but you have no property in his daughter, and I suspect that
she will not be quite so easily handed over to you."

"But why should you say so, Humphrey? Have we not been attached from
our youth?"

"Yes, it was a youthful passion, I grant; but recollect nothing came of
it, and years have passed away. It is now seven years since you quitted
the forest, and in your letters to Mr. Heatherstone you made no remark
upon what had passed between you and Patience. Since that, you have
never corresponded or sent any messages; and you can hardly expect that
a girl, from the age of seventeen to twenty-four, will cherish the
image of one, who, to say the least, had treated her with indifference.
That is my view of the matter, Edward. It may be wrong."

"And it may be true," replied Edward, mournfully.

"Well, my view is different," replied Edith. "You know, Humphrey, how
many offers Patience Heatherstone has had, and has every day, I may
say. Why has she refused them all I In my opinion, because she has been
constant to a proud brother of mine, who does not deserve her!"

"It may be so, Edith," replied Humphrey. "Women are riddles--I only
argued upon the common sense of the thing."

"Much you know about women," replied Edith. "To be sure, you do not
meet many in the New Forest, where you have lived all your life."

"Very true, my dear sister; perhaps that is the reason that the New
Forest has had such charms for me."

"After that speech, sir, the sooner you get back again the better!"
retorted Edith. But Edward made a sign to Humphrey, and they beat a
retreat.

"Have you seen the intendant, Humphrey?"

"No; I was about to call upon him, but I wanted to see you first."

"I will go with you. I have not done him justice," replied Edward; "and
yet I hardly know how to explain to him."

"Say nothing, but meet him cordially; that will be explanation
sufficient."

"I shall meet him as one whom I shall always revere and feel that I owe
a deep debt of gratitude. What must he think of my not having called
upon him!"

"Nothing. You hold a place at court. You may not have known that he was
in London, as you have never met him; your coming with me will make it
appear so. Tell him that I have just made known to you his noble and
disinterested conduct."

"You are right--I will. I fear, however, Humphrey, that you are right
and Edith wrong as regards his daughter."

"Nay, Edward, recollect that I have, as Edith observed, passed my life
in the woods."

Edward was most kindly received by Mr. Heatherstone. Edward, on Mr.
Heatherstone repeating to him his intentions relative to Arnwood,
expressed his sense of that gentleman's conduct, simply adding--

"You may think me impetuous, sir, but I trust you will believe me
grateful."

Patience colored up and trembled when Edward first saw her. Edward did
not refer to the past for some time after they had renewed their
acquaintance. He wooed her again, and won her. Then all was explained.

About a year after the Restoration, there was a fete at Hampton Court,
given in honor of three marriages taking place--Edward Beverley to
Patience Heatherstone, Chaloner to Alice, and Grenville to Edith; and,
as his majesty himself said, as he gave away the brides, "Could loyalty
be better rewarded?"

But our young readers will not be content if they do not hear some
particulars about the other personages who have appeared in our little
history. Humphrey must take the first place. His love of farming
continued. Edward gave him a large farm, rent free; and in a few years
Humphrey saved up sufficient to purchase a property for himself. He
then married Clara Ratcliffe, who has not appeared lately on the scene,
owing to her having been, about two years before the Restoration,
claimed by an elderly relation, who lived in the country, and whose
infirm state of health did not permit him to quit the house. He left
his property to Clara, about a year after her marriage to Humphrey. The
cottage in the New Forest was held by, and eventually made over to,
Pablo, who became a very steady character, and in the course of time
married a young girl from Arnwood, and had a houseful of young gipsies.
Oswald, so soon as Edward came down to Arnwood, gave up his place in
the New Forest, and lived entirely with Edward as his steward; and
Phoebe also went to Arnwood, and lived to a good old age, in the
capacity of housekeeper, her temper becoming rather worse than better
as she advanced in years.

This is all that we have been able to collect relative to the several
parties; and so now we must say farewell.

THE END.
