CHAPTER 15. ABOUT SOME PEOPLE WHO THOUGHT NO EVIL.

A few days after this Hester was much delighted to receive an invitation
from her little friends, the Misses Bruce.  These good ladies had not
forgotten the lonely and miserable child whom they had comforted not a
little during her journey to school six weeks ago.  They invited Hester
to spend the next half-holiday with them, and as this happened to fall
on a Saturday, Mrs Willis gave Hester permission to remain with her
friends until eight o'clock, when she would send the carriage to fetch
her home.

The trouble about Annie had taken place the Wednesday before, and all
the girls' heads were full of the uncleared-up mystery when Hester
started on her little expedition.

Nothing was known; no fresh light had been thrown on the subject.
Everything went on as usual within the school, and a casual observer
would never have noticed the cloud which rested over that usually happy
dwelling.  A casual observer would have noticed little or no change in
Annie Forest; her merry laugh was still heard, her light step still
danced across the play-room floor, she was in her place in class, and
was, if anything, a little more attentive and a little more successful
over her lessons.  Her pretty, piquant face, her arch expression, the
bright, quick and droll glance which she alone could give, were still to
be seen; but those who knew her well and those who loved her best saw a
change in Annie.

In the play-room she devoted herself exclusively to the little ones; she
never went near Cecil Temple's drawing-room, she never mingled with the
girls of the middle school as they clustered round the cheerful fire.
At meal-times she ate little, and her room-fellow was heard to declare
that she was awakened more than once in the middle of the night by the
sound of Annie's sobs.  In chapel, too, when she fancied herself quite
unobserved, her face wore an expression of great pain; but if Mrs
Willis happened to glance in her direction, instantly the little mouth
became demure and almost hard, the dark eyelashes were lowered over the
bright eyes, the whole expression of the face showed the extreme of
indifference.  Hester felt more sure than ever of Annie's guilt; but one
or two of the other girls in the school wavered in this opinion, and
would have taken Annie out of "Coventry" had she herself made the
smallest advance toward them.

Annie and Hester had not spoken to each other now for several days; but
on this afternoon, which was a bright one in early spring, as Hester was
changing her school-dress for her Sunday one, and preparing for her
visit to the Misses Bruce, there came a light knock at her door.  She
said "Come in," rather impatiently, for she was in a hurry, and dreaded
being kept.

To her surprise Annie Forest put in her curly head, and then, dancing
with her usual light movement across the room, she laid a little bunch
of dainty spring flowers on the dressing-table beside Hester.

Hester stared, first at the intruder and then at the early primroses.
She passionately loved flowers, and would have exclaimed with ecstasy at
these had anyone brought them in except Annie.

"I want you," said Annie, rather timidly for her, "to take these flowers
from me to Miss Agnes and Miss Jane Bruce.  It will be very kind of you
if you will take them.  I am sorry to have interrupted you--thank you
very much."

She was turning away when Hester compelled herself to remark--

"Is there any message with the flowers?"

"Oh, no--only Annie Forest's love.  They'll understand."  She turned
half round as she spoke, and Hester saw that her eyes had filled with
tears.  She felt touched in spite of herself.  There was something in
Annie's face now which reminded her of her darling little Nan at home.
She had seen the same beseeching, sorrowful look in Nan's brown eyes
when she had wanted her friends to kiss her and take her to their hearts
and love her.

Hester would not allow herself, however, to feel any tenderness toward
Annie.  Of course she was not really a bit like sweet little Nan, and it
was absurd to suppose that a great girl like Annie could want caressing
and petting and soothing; still, in spite of herself, Annie's look
haunted her, and she took great care of the little flower-offering, and
presented it with Annie's message instantly on her arrival to the little
old ladies.

Miss Jane and Miss Agnes were very much pleased with the early
primroses.  They looked at one another and said--

"Poor dear little girl," in tender voices, and then they put the flowers
into one of their daintiest vases, and made much of them, and showed
them to any visitors who happened to call that afternoon.

Their little house looked something like a doll's house to Hester, who
had been accustomed all her life to large rooms and spacious passages;
but it was the sweetest, daintiest, and most charming little abode in
the world.  It was not unlike a nest, and the Misses Bruce in certain
ways resembled bright little robin redbreasts, so small, so neat, so
chirrupy they were.

Hester enjoyed her afternoon immensely; the little ladies were right in
their prophecy, and she was no longer lonely at school.  She enjoyed
talking about her school-fellows, about her new life, about her studies.
The Misses Bruce were decidedly fond of a gossip, but something which
she could not at all define in their manner prevented Hester from
retailing for their benefit any unkind news.  They told her frankly at
last that they were only interested in the good things which went on in
the school, and that they found no pursuit so altogether delightful as
finding out the best points in all the people they came across.  They
would not even laugh at sleepy, tiresome Susan Drummond; on the
contrary, they pitied her, and Miss Jane wondered if the girl could be
quite well, whereupon Miss Agnes shook her head, and said emphatically
that it was Hester's duty to rouse poor Susy, and to make her waking
life so interesting to her that she should no longer care to spend so
many hours in the world of dreams.

There is such a thing as being so kind-hearted, so gentle, so charitable
as to make the people who have not encouraged these virtues feel quite
uncomfortable.  By the mere force of contrast they begin to see
themselves something as they really are.  Since Hester had come to
Lavender House she had taken very little pains to please others rather
than herself, and she was now almost startled to see how she had allowed
selfishness to get the better of her.  While the Misses Bruce were
speaking, old longings, which had slept since her mother's death, came
back to the young girl, and she began to wish that she could be kinder
to Susan Drummond, and that she could overcome her dislike to Annie
Forest.  She longed to say something about Annie to the little ladies,
but they evidently did not wish to allude to the subject.  When she was
going away, they gave her a small parcel.

"You will kindly give this to your schoolfellow, Miss Forest, Hester
dear," they both said, and then they kissed her, and said they hoped
they should see her again: and Hester got into the old-fashioned school
brougham, and held the brown-paper parcel in her hand.

As she was going into the chapel that night, Mary Bell came up to her
and whispered--

"We have not got to the bottom of that mystery about Annie Forest yet.
Mrs Willis can evidently make nothing of her, and I believe Mr Everard
is going to talk to her after prayers to-night."

As she was speaking, Annie herself pushed rather rudely past the two
girls; her face was flushed, and her hair was even more untidy than was
its wont.

"Here is a parcel for you, Miss Forest," said Hester, in a much more
gentle tone than she was wont to use when she addressed this
objectionable school-mate.

All the girls were now filing into the chapel, and Hester should
certainly not have presented the little parcel at that moment.

"Breaking the rules, Miss Thornton," said Annie; "all right, toss it
here."  Then, as Hester failed to comply, she ran back, knocking her
school-fellows out of place, and, snatching the parcel from Hester's
hand, threw it high in the air.  This was a piece of not only wilful
audacity and disobedience, but it even savoured of the profane, for
Annie's step was on the threshold of the chapel, and the parcel fell
with a noisy bang on the floor some feet inside the little building.

"Bring me that parcel, Annie Forest," whispered the stern voice of the
head-mistress.

Annie sullenly complied; but when she came up to Mrs Willis, her
governess took her hand, and pushed her down into a low seat a little
behind her.

