CHAPTER 36. HOW MOSES MOORE KEPT HIS APPOINTMENT.

Susan Drummond got back to Lavender House without apparent discovery.
She was certainly late when she took her place in the class-room for her
next day's preparation; but, beyond a very sharp reprimand from
Mademoiselle, no notice was taken of this fact.  She managed to whisper
to Nora and Phyllis that the basket would be moved by the first dawn the
next morning, and the little girls went to bed happier in consequence.
Nothing ever could disturb Susan's slumbers, and that night she
certainly slept without rocking.  As she was getting into bed she
ventured to tell Annie how successfully she had manoeuvred; but Annie
received her news with the most absolute indifference, looking at her
for a moment with a queer smile, and then saying--

"My own wish is that this should be found out.  As a matter of course, I
sha'n't betray you, girls; but as things now stand I am anxious that
Mrs Willis should know the very worst of me."

After a remark which Susan considered so simply idiotic, there was, of
course, no further conversation between the two girls.

Moses Moore had certainly promised Betty to rise soon after dawn on the
following morning and go to Lavender House to carry off the basket from
under the laurel-tree.  Moses, a remarkably indolent lad, had been
stimulated by the thought of the delicious cherries which would be his
as soon as he brought the basket to Betty.  He had cleverly stipulated
that a quart--not a pint--of cherries was to be his reward, and he
looked forward with considerable pleasure to picking them himself, and
putting a few extra ones into his mouth on the sly.

Moses was not at all the kind of boy who would have scrupled to steal a
few cherries; but in this particular old Betty, ill as she was, was too
sharp for him, or for any of the other village lads.  Her bed was drawn
up close to her little window, and her window looked directly on to the
two cherry trees.  Never, to all appearance, did Betty close her eyes.
However early the hour might be in which a village boy peeped over the
wall of her garden, he always saw her white night-cap moving, and he
knew that her bright blue eyes would be on him, and he would be
proclaimed a thief all over the place before many minutes were over.

Moses, therefore, was very glad to secure his cherries by fair means, as
he could not obtain them by foul; and he went to bed and to sleep
determined to be off on his errand with the dawn.

A very natural thing, however, happened.  Moses, unaccustomed to getting
up at half-past three in the morning, never opened his eyes until the
church clock struck five.  Then he started upright, rubbed and rubbed at
his sleepy orbs, tumbled into his clothes, and, softly opening the
cottage door, set off on his errand.

The fact of his being nearly an hour and a half late did not trouble him
in the least.  In any case, he would get to Lavender House before six
o'clock, and would have consumed his cherries in less than an hour from
that date.

Moses sauntered gayly along the roads, whistling as he went, and
occasionally tossing his battered cap in the air.  He often lingered on
his way, now to cut down a particularly tempting switch from the hedge,
now to hunt for a possible bird's nest.  It was very, nearly six o'clock
when he reached the back avenue, swung himself over the gate, which was
locked, and ran softly on the dewy grass in the direction of the
laurel-bush.  Old Betty had given him most careful instructions, and he
was far too sharp a lad to forget what was necessary for the obtaining
of a quart of cherries.  He found his tree, and lay flat down on the
ground in order to pull out the basket.  His fingers had just clasped
the handle when there came a sudden interruption--a rush, a growl, and
some very sharp teeth had inserted themselves into the back of his
ragged jacket.  Poor Moses found himself, to his horror, in the clutches
of a great mastiff.  The creature held him tight, and laid one heavy paw
on him to prevent him rising.

Under these circumstances, Moses thought it quite unnecessary to retain
any self-control.  He shrieked, he screamed, he wriggled; his piercing
yells filled the air, and, fortunately for him, his being two hours too
late brought assistance to his aid.  Michael, the gardener, and a strong
boy who helped him, rushed to the spot, and liberated the terrified lad,
who, after all, was only frightened, for Rover had satisfied himself
with tearing his jacket to pieces, not himself.

"Give me the b-basket," sobbed Moses, "and let me g-g-go."

"You may certainly go, you little tramp," said Michael, "but Jim and me
will keep the basket.  I much misdoubt me if there isn't mischief here.
What's the basket put hiding here for, and who does it belong to?"

"Old B-B-Betty," gasped forth the agitated Moses.

"Well, let old Betty fetch it herself.  Mrs Willis will keep it for
her," said Michael.  "Come along, Jim, get to your weeding, do.  There,
little scamp, you had better make yourself scarce."

Moses certainly look his advice, for he scuttled off like a hare.
Whether he ever got his cherries or not, history does not disclose.

Michael, looking gravely at Jim, opened the basket, examined its
contents, and, shaking his head solemnly, carried it into the house.

"There's been deep work going on, Jim, and my Missis ought to know,"
said Michael, who was an exceedingly strict disciplinarian.  Jim,
however, had a soft corner in his heart for the young ladies, and he
commenced his weeding with a profound sigh.

