CHAPTER 8. "YOU HAVE WOKEN ME TOO SOON."

When Hester reached her bedroom after prayers on that second evening,
she was dismayed to find that she no longer could consider the pretty
little bedroom her own.  It had not only an occupant, but an occupant
who had left untidy traces of her presence on the floor, for a stocking
lay in one direction and a muddy boot sprawled in another.  The newcomer
had herself got into bed, where she lay with a quantity of red hair
tossed about on the pillow, and a heavy freckled face turned upward,
with the eyes shut and the mouth slightly open.

As Hester entered the room, from these parted lips came unmistakable and
loud snores.  She stood still dismayed.

"How terrible!" she said to herself--"oh, what a girl! and I cannot
sleep in the room with any one who snores--I really cannot!"

She stood perfectly still, with her hands clasped before her, and her
eyes fixed with almost ludicrous dismay on this unexpected trial.  As
she gazed, a fresh discovery caused her to utter an exclamation of
horror aloud.

The newcomer had curled herself up comfortably in _her_ bed.  Suddenly,
to her surprise, a voice said very quietly, without a flicker of
expression coming over the calm face, or the eyes even making an effort
to open--

"Are you my new school-mate?"

"Yes," said Hester, "I am sorry to say I am."

"Oh, don't be sorry, there's a good creature; there's nothing to be
sorry about.  I'll stop snoring when I turn on my side--it's all right.
I always snore for half an hour to rest my back, and the time is nearly
up.  Don't trouble me to open my eyes, I am not the least curious to see
you.  You have a cross voice, but you'll get used to me after a bit."

"But you're in my bed," said Hester.  "Will you please to get into your
own?"

"Oh, no, don't ask me; I like your bed best.  I slept in it the whole of
last term.  I changed the sheets myself, so it does not matter.  Do you
mind putting my muddy boots outside the door, and folding up my
stockings?  I forgot them, and I shall have a bad mark if Danesbury
comes in.  Good-night--I'm turning on my side--I won't snore any more."

The heavy face was now only seen in profile, and Hester, knowing that
Miss Danesbury would soon appear to put out the candle, had to hurry
into the other bed as fast as she could; something impelled her,
however, to take up the muddy boots with two very gingerly fingers, and
place them outside the door.

She slept better this second night, and was not quite so startled the
next morning when the remorseless gong aroused her from slumber.  The
maid-servant came in as usual to light the candles, and to place two
cans of hot water by the two wash-handstands.

"You are awake, miss?" she said to Hester.

"Oh, yes," replied Hester almost cheerfully.

"Well, that's all right," said the servant.  "Now I must try and rouse
Miss Drummond, and she always takes a deal of waking; and if you don't
mind, miss, it will be an act of kindness to call out to her in the
middle of your own dressing--that is, if I don't wake her effectual."

With these words, the housemaid approached the bed where the red-haired
girl lay again on her back, and again snoring loudly.

"Miss Drummond, wake, miss; it's half-past six.  Wake up, miss--I have
brought your hot water."

"Eh?--what?" said the voice in the bed sleepily; "don't bother me,
Hannah--I--I've determined not to ride this morning; go away--" then
more sleepily, and in a lower key, "Tell Percy he can't bring the dogs
in here."

"I ain't neither your Hannah, nor your Percy, nor one of the dogs,"
replied the rather irate Alice--"There, get up, miss, do.  I never see
such a young lady for sleeping, never."

"I won't be bothered," said the occupant of the bed, and now she turned
deliberately on her side and snored more loudly than ever.

"There's no help for it," said Alice: "I have to do it nearly every
morning, so don't you be startled, miss.  Poor thing, she would never
have a good conduct mark but for me.  Now then, here goes.  You needn't
be frightened, miss--she don't mind it the least bit in the world."

Here Alice seized a rough Turkish towel, placed it under the sleepy head
with its shock of red hair, and, dipping a sponge in a basin of icy cold
water, dashed it on the white face.

This remedy proved effectual; two large pale blue eyes opened wide, a
voice said in a tranquil and unmoved tone--

"Oh, thank you, Alice.  So I'm back at this horrid, detestable school
again?"

"Get your feet well on the carpet, Miss Drummond, before you falls off
again," said the servant.  "Now then, you'd better get dressed as fast
as possible, miss--you have lost five minutes already."

Hester, who had laughed immoderately during this little scene, was
already up and going through the processes of her toilet.  Miss
Drummond, seated on the edge of her bed, regarded her with sleepy eyes.

"So you are my new room-mate?" she said--"What's your name?"

"Hester Thornton," replied Hetty with dignity.

"Oh--I'm Susy Drummond--you may call me Susy if you like."

Hester made no response to this gracious invitation.

Miss Drummond sat motionless, gazing down at her toes.

"Had not you better get dressed?" said Hester after a long pause, for
she really feared the young lady would fall asleep where she was
sitting.

Miss Drummond started.

"Dressed!  So I will, dear creature.  Have the sweet goodness to hand me
my clothes."

"Where are they?" asked Hester rather crossly, for she did not care to
act as lady's-maid.

"They are over there, on a chair, in that lovely heap with a shawl flung
over them.  There, toss them this way--I'll get into them somehow."

Miss Drummond did manage to get into her garments; but her whole
appearance was so heavy and untidy when she was dressed, that Hester by
the very force of contrast felt obliged to take extra pains with her own
toilet.

"Now, that's a comfort," said Susan, "I'm in my clothes.  How bitter it
is!  There's one comfort, the chapel will be warm.  I often catch forty
winks in chapel--that is, if I'm lucky enough to get behind one of the
tall girls, where Mrs Willis won't see me.  It does seem to me,"
continued Susan in a meditative tone, "the strangest thing why girls are
not allowed sleep enough."

Hester was pinning a clean collar round her neck when Miss Drummond came
up close, leaned over the dressing-table, and regarded her with languid
curiosity.

"A penny for your thoughts.  Miss Prunes and Prism."

"Why do you call me that?" said Hester angrily.

"Because you look like it, sweet.  Now, don't be cross, little pet--no
one ever yet was cross with sleepy Susy Drummond.  Now, tell me, love,
what had you for breakfast yesterday?"

"I'm sure I forget," said Hester.

"You _forget_?--how extraordinary!  You're sure that it was not buttered
scones?  We have them sometimes, and I tell you they are enough even to
keep a girl awake.  Well, at least you can let me know if the eggs were
very stale, and the coffee very weak, and whether the butter was
second-rate Dorset, or good and fresh.  Come now--my breakfast is of
immense importance to me, I assure you."

"I dare say," answered Hester.  "You can see for yourself this morning
what is on the table--I can only inform you that it was good enough for
me, and that I don't remember what it was."

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Susan Drummond, "I'm afraid she has a little
temper of her own--poor little room-mate.  I wonder if chocolate-creams
would sweeten that little temper?"

"Please don't talk--I'm going to say my prayers," said Hester.

She did kneel down, and made a slight effort to ask God to help her
through the day's work and the day's play.  In consequence, she rose
from her knees with a feeling of strength and sweetness which even the
feeblest prayer when uttered in earnest can always give.

The prayer-gong now sounded, and all the girls assembled in the chapel.
Miss Drummond was greeted by many appreciative nods, and more than one
pair of longing eyes gazed in the direction of her pockets, which stuck
out in the most ungainly fashion.

Hester was relieved to find that her room-mate did not share her class
in school, nor sit anywhere near her at table.

When the half-hour's recreation after breakfast arrived, Hester,
determined to be beholden to none of her school-mates for companionship,
seated herself comfortably in an easy chair, with a new book.  Presently
she was startled by a little stream of lollipops falling in a shower
over her head, down her neck, and into her lap.  She started up with an
expression of disgust.  Instantly Miss Drummond sank into the vacated
chair.

"Thank you, love," she said, in a cosy, purring voice.  "Eat your
lollipops, and look at me; I'm going to sleep.  Please pull my toe when
Danesbury comes in.  Oh, fie!  Prunes and Prisms--not so cross--eat your
lollipops; they will sweeten the expression of that--little--face."

The last words came out drowsily.  As she said "face," Miss Drummond's
languid eyes were closed--she was fast asleep.

