CHAPTER XIII. THE AMUSING DRIVE.

  I would not enter on my list of friends
  (Though grac'd with polish'd manners and fine sense,
  Yet wanting sensibility) the man
  Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.

                                        Cowper.


Lady Harriet was confined to bed for several days after Frank's
departure from home, and during all that week Harry and Laura felt so
melancholy, that even Mrs. Crabtree became sorry for them, saying it was
quite distressing to see how quiet and good they had become, for Master
Harry was as mild as milk now, and she almost wished he would be at some
of his old tricks again.

On the following Monday, a message arrived from Lady Rockville, to say
that she was going a long drive in her phaeton, to visit some boys at
Musselburgh school, and would be happy to take Harry and Laura of the
party, if their grandmama had no objection. None being made by anybody,
they flew up stairs to get ready, while Harry did not take above three
steps at a time, and Laura, when she followed, felt quite astonished to
find Mrs. Crabtree looking almost as pleased as herself, and saying she
hoped the expedition would do them both good.

Before five minutes had elapsed, Harry was mounted on the dickey, where
Lady Rockville desired him to sit, instead of the footman, who was now
dismissed, as no room could be made for both; so after that Harry
touched his hat whenever any of the party spoke to him, as if he had
really been the servant.

Laura, meanwhile, was placed between Lady Rockville and Miss Perceval,
where she could hardly keep quiet a minute for joy, though afraid to
turn her head or to stir her little finger, in case of being thought
troublesome.

"I am told that the races take place at Musselburgh to-day," said Lady
Rockville. "It is a cruel amusement, derived from the sufferings of
noble animals; they have as good a right to be happy in the world as
ourselves, Laura; but we shall pass that way, so Harry and you will
probably see the crowds of carriages."

"Oh, how enchanting!--I never saw a race-course in my life!" exclaimed
Laura, springing off her seat with delight. "Harry! Harry! we are going
to the races!"

"Hurra!" exclaimed Harry, clapping his hands; "what a delightful
surprise! Oh! I am so dreadfully happy!"

"After all, my dear Lady Rockville," said Miss Perceval, yawning, "what
have horses got legs for, except to run?"

"Yes, but not at such a pace! It always shocked me--formerly at
Doncaster, where the jockeys were sometimes paid £1000 for winning--to
see how the poor animals were lashed and spurred along the course,
foaming with fatigue, gasping till they nearly expired. Horses, poor
creatures, from the hour of their birth till their death, have a sad
time of it!"

"Grandmama once read me a beautiful description of a wild horse in his
natural state of liberty," said Laura. "Among the South American forests
he was to be seen carrying his head erect, with sparkling eyes, flowing
mane, and splendid tail, trotting about among the noble trees, or
cropping the grass at his feet, looking quite princely, and doing
precisely what he pleased."

"Then look at the contrast," said Lady Rockville, pointing to a long row
of cart-horses with galled sides, shrivelled skins, broken knees, and
emaciated bodies, which were all dragging their weary load along.
"Animals are all meant for the use of man, but not to be abused, like
these poor creatures!"

"As for racing," said Miss Perceval, "a thorough-bred horse enters into
the spirit of it quite as much as his rider. Did you never hear of
Quin's celebrated steed, which became so eager to win, that when his
antagonist passed he seized him violently by the leg, and both jockeys
had to dismount that the furious animal might be torn away. The famous
horse Forester, too, caught hold of his opponent by the jaw, and could
scarcely be disengaged."

"Think of all the cruel training these poor creatures went through
before they came to that," added Lady Rockville; "of the way in which
horses are beaten, spurred, and severely cut with the whip; then, after
their strength fails, like the well-known 'high-mettled racer,' the poor
animal is probably sold at last to perpetual hard labour and ill-usage."

"Uncle David shewed me yesterday," said Laura, "that horrid picture
which you have probably seen, by Cruickshanks, of the Knackers' Yards in
London, where old horses are sent to end their miserable days, after it
is impossible to torture them any longer into working. Oh! it was
dreadful! and yet grandmama said the whole sketch had been taken from
life."

"I know that," answered Lady Rockville. "In these places the wretched
animals are literally put to death by starvation, and may be seen
gnawing each other's manes in the last agonies of hunger."

"My dear Lady Rockville," exclaimed Miss Perceval, affectedly, "how can
you talk of such unpleasant things!--there is an Act of Parliament
against cruelty to animals, so of course no such thing exists now. Many
gentlemen are vastly kind to old horses, turning them out to grass for
years, that they may enjoy a life of elegant leisure and rural
retirement, to which, no doubt, some are well entitled; for instance,
the famous horse Eclipse, which gained his owner £25,000! I wish he had
been mine!"

"But think how many are ruined when one is enriched, and indeed both are
ruined in morals and good feeling; therefore I am glad that our sex have
never yet taken to the turf. It is bad enough, my dear Miss Perceval, to
see that they have taken to the moors; for were I to say all I think of
those amazons who lately killed their six brace of grouse on the 12th of
August, they would probably challenge me to single combat. Lord
Rockville says, 'What with gentlemen doing worsted work, and ladies
shouldering double-barrelled guns, he scarcely thinks this can be the
same world he was born in long ago.'"

The carriage, at this moment, began to proceed along the road with such
extraordinary rapidity, that there seemed no danger of their following
in the dust of any other equipage, and Miss Perceval became exceedingly
alarmed, especially when Lady Rockville mentioned that this was one of
the first times she had been driven by her new coachman, who seemed so
very unsteady on his seat, she had felt apprehensive, for some time,
that he might be drunk.

"A tipsy coachman! Dear Lady Rockville, do let me out! We shall
certainly be killed in this crowd of carriages! I can walk home! Pray
stop him, Miss Laura! I came to look on at a race, but not to run one
myself! This fast driving is like a railroad, only not quite so
straight! I do verily believe we are run off with! Stop,
coachman!--stop!"

In spite of all Miss Perceval's exclamations and vociferations, the
carriage flew on with frightful rapidity, though it reeled from side to
side of the road, as if it had become intoxicated like the driver
himself, who lashed his horses and galloped along, within an inch of
hedges and ditches all the way, till at last, having reached the
race-course, he pulled up so suddenly and violently, that the horses
nearly fell back on their haunches, while he swore at them in the most
furious and shocking manner.

Lady Rockville now stood up, and spoke to the coachman very severely on
his misconduct, in first driving her so dangerously fast, and then being
disrespectful enough to use profane language in her presence, adding,
that if he did not conduct himself more properly, she must complain to
Lord Rockville as soon as the carriage returned home. Upon hearing this,
the man looked exceedingly sulky, and muttered angrily to himself in a
tipsy voice, till at last he suddenly threw away the reins, and, rising
from the box, he began to scramble his way down, nearly falling to the
ground in his haste, and saying, "if your ladyship is not pleased with
my driving, you may drive yourself!"

After this the intoxicated man staggered towards a drinking-booth not
far off, and disappeared, leaving Miss Perceval perfectly planet-struck
with astonishment, and actually dumb during several minutes with wonder,
at all she heard and saw. There sat Harry, alone on the dicky, behind
two spirited blood-horses, foaming at the mouth with the speed at which
they had come, and ready to start off again at the slightest hint, while
noises on every side were to be heard enough to frighten a pair of
hobby-horses. Piemen ringing their bells--blind fiddlers playing out of
tune--boys calling lists of the horses--drums beating at the
starting-post--ballad singers squalling at the full pitch of their
voices--horses galloping--grooms quarrelling--dogs barking--and children
crying.

In the midst of all this uproar, Harry unexpectedly observed Captain
Digby on horseback not far off. Without losing a moment, he stood up,
waving his handkerchief, and calling to beg he would come to the
carriage immediately, as they were in want of assistance; and Lady
Rockville told, as soon as he arrived, though hardly able to help
laughing while she explained it, the extraordinary predicament they had
been placed in. Captain Digby, upon hearing the story, looked ready to
go off like a squib with rage at the offending coachman, and instantly
seizing the driving-whip, he desired his servant to hold the horses'
heads, while he proceeded towards the drinking-booth, flourishing the
long lash in his hand as he went in a most ominous manner. Several
minutes elapsed, during which Harry overheard a prodigious outcry in the
tent, and then the drunken coachman was seen reeling away along the
road, while Captain Digby, still brandishing the whip, returned, and
mounting the dicky himself, he gathered up the reins, and insisted on
driving Lady Rockville's phaeton for her. Before long it was ranged
close beside a chariot so full of ladies, it seemed ready to burst, when
Harry was amused to perceive that Peter Grey and another boy, who were
seated on the rumble behind, had spread a table-cloth on the roof of the
carriage, using it for a dining-table, while they all seemed determined
to astonish their appetites by the quantity of oysters and sandwiches
they ate, and by drinking at the same time large tumblers of porter.
Lady Rockville wished she could have the loan of Harry and Laura's
spirits for an hour or two, when she saw how perfectly bewildered with
delight they were on beholding the thousands of eager persons assembled
on the race-ground,--jockeys riding about in liveries as gay as
tulips--officers in scarlet uniform--red flags fluttering in the
breeze--caravans exhibiting pictures of the wildest-looking beasts in
the world--bands of music--recruiting parties--fire-eaters, who dined on
red-hot pokers--portraits representing pigs fatter than the fattest in
the world--giants a head and three pair of shoulders taller than any
one else, and little dwarfs, scarcely visible with the naked eye--all of
which were shown to children for half price!

Lady Rockville very good naturedly gave Harry half-a-crown, promising
that, before leaving the race-ground, he should either buy some oranges
to lay the dust in his throat after so long a drive, or visit as many
shows as he pleased for his half-crown; and they were anxiously
discussing what five sights would be worth sixpence each, when a loud
hurra was heard, the drums beat, and five horses started off for the
first heat. Harry stood up in an ecstacy of delight, and spoke loudly in
admiration of the jockey on a grey horse, with a pink jacket, who took
the lead, and seemed perfectly to fly, as if he need never touch the
ground; but Harry exclaimed angrily against the next rider, in a yellow
dress and green cap, who pulled back his own bay horse, as if he really
wished to lose. To Laura's astonishment, however, Captain Digby
preferred him, and Miss Perceval declared in favour of a light-blue
jacket and chesnut horse. Harry now thought everybody stupid not to
agree with him, and called out in the height of his eagerness, "I would
bet this half-crown upon the pink jacket!"

"Done!" cried Peter, laughing. "The yellow dress and green cap for my
money!"

"Then I shall soon have five shillings!" exclaimed Harry in great glee;
but scarcely had he spoken, before a loud murmuring sound arose among
the surrounding crowd, upon hearing which he looked anxiously about, and
was astonished to see the green cap and yellow dress already at the
winning-post, while his own favourite grey horse cantered slowly along,
far behind all the others, carrying the jockey in the pink jacket, who
hung his head, and was bent nearly double, with shame and fatigue.

Peter Grey gave a loud laugh of triumph when he glanced at Harry's
disappointed angry countenance, and held out his hand for the
half-crown, saying, "Pay your debt of honour, Master Harry! It is rather
fortunate I won, seeing that not one sixpence had I to have paid you
with! not a penny to jingle on a mile-stone. You had more money than
wit, and I had more wit than money, so we are well met. Did you not see
that the grey horse had fallen lame? Good-bye, youngster! I shall tell
all the giants and wild beasts to expect you another day!"

"Harry!" said Lady Rockville, looking gravely at his enraged
countenance, "it is a foolish fish that is caught with every bait! I am
quite relieved that you lost that money. This is an early lesson against
gambling, and no one can ever be rich or happy who becomes fond of it.
We were wrong to bring you here at all; and I now see you could easily
be led into that dreadful vice, which has caused misery and ruin to
thousands of young men. If you had possessed an estate, it would have
been thrown away quite as foolishly as the poor half-crown, making you
perhaps miserable afterwards for life."

"I thought myself quite sure to win!" exclaimed Harry, still looking
with angry astonishment after Peter, who was making odd grimaces, and
holding up the half-crown in a most teazing manner. "I would rather have
thrown my money into the sea than given it to Peter."

"Think, too, how many pleasanter and better ways there are, in which you
might have spent it!" added Lady Rockville. "Look at that poor blind man
whom you could have relieved, or consider what a nice present you should
have given to Laura! But there seem to be no more brains in your head,
Harry, than in her thimble!"

"Peter is quite a little black-leg already," observed Miss Perceval. "I
never saw such a boy! So fond of attracting notice, that he would put on
a cap and bells if that would make him stared at. Last Saturday he
undertook for a bet to make a ceremonious bow to every lamp-post along
Prince's Street, and I wish you could have seen the wondering crowd that
gradually collected as he went along, performing his task with the most
perfect composure and impudence."

"For cool assurance, I hope there are not many boys equal to him," said
Lady Rockville. "He scattered out of the window lately several red-hot
half-pence, among some beggars, and I am told they perfectly stuck to
the poor creatures' fingers when trying to pick them up; and he was sent
a message, on his pony, one very cold day lately, to Lady De Vere's, who
offered, when he was taking leave, to cut him one of her finest
camellias, to which he replied, 'I would much rather you offered me a
hot potatoe!'"

"Peter feels no sympathy in your disappointment, Harry," added Miss
Perceval; "but we might as well expect wool on a dog, as friendship from
a gambler, who would ruin his own father, and always laughs at those who
lose."

"Go and cut your wisdom teeth, Harry!" said Captain Digby, smiling. "Any
one must have been born blind not to observe that the grey horse was
falling behind; but you have bought half-a-crown's worth of wisdom by
experience, and I hope it will last for life. Never venture to bet even
that your own head is on your shoulders, or it may turn out a mistake."

"Harry is now the monkey that has seen the world, and I think it will be
a whole year of Saturdays before he ever commits such a blunder again,"
continued Lady Rockville. "We must for this once, not complain of what
has occurred to Lady Harriet, because she would be exceedingly
displeased, but certainly you are a most ingenious little gentleman for
getting into scrapes!"

Harry told upon himself, however, on his return home, because he had
always been accustomed to do so, knowing Major Graham and his grandmama
were never very angry at any fault that was confessed and repented of,
therefore he went straight up stairs, and related his whole history to
uncle David, who gave him a very serious exhortation against the foolish
and sinful vice of gambling. To keep him in mind of his silly adventure
that day, Harry was also desired, during the whole evening, to wear his
coat turned inside out, a very frequent punishment administered by Major
Graham for small offences, and which was generally felt to be a terrible
disgrace.




