CHAPTER 20.

Everything was now preparing for their removal to the leeward side of
the island.  Ready had nearly completed the boat; he had given it a
thorough repair, and fitted a mast and sail.  William and Mr Seagrave
continued to collect and secure the various articles thrown on shore,
particularly such as would be injured by their exposure to the weather:
these they rolled or carried into the cocoa-nut grove, so as to be
sheltered from the sun; but there were so many things thrown on shore
day after day, that they hardly knew what they had: but they secured
case and cask one after another, waiting for a better opportunity to
examine their contents.  At last they collected a great many articles
together, and, with their shovels, covered them over with sand, it being
impossible to get them from the beach without more time than they could
spare.

Neither was Mrs Seagrave, who was now getting quite strong, or Juno,
idle.  They had made up everything that they could in packages, ready
for moving.  On the eighth day after the gale, they were ready, and it
was arranged that Ready should put into the boat the bedding and canvas
of one tent, and should take William with him on his expedition.  Having
transported this safe, he should return for a load of the most necessary
articles, and then the family should walk through the grove to the other
side of the island, and remain there with Mr Seagrave while Ready and
William returned for the other tent; and after that, the boat should
make as many trips as the weather would permit, till they had brought
all the things absolutely required.  It was a lovely calm morning when
Ready and William pushed off in the boat, which was well loaded; and as
soon as they were clear of the cove they hoisted the sail, and went away
before the wind along the coast.  In two hours they had run to the
eastern end of the island, and hauled up close inshore: the point which
ran out, and at the end of which there was an inlet, was not a mile from
them, and in a very short time they had lowered the sail, and were
pulling in for the sandy beach.

"You see, William, it is fortunate for us that we shall always have a
fair wind when we come down loaded, and only have to pull our empty boat
back again."

"Indeed it is.  How many miles do you think it is from the cove to this
part of the island?"

"About six or seven, not more: the island, you see, is long and narrow.
Now let us get the things out and carry them up, and then we will be
back to the cove long before dark."

The boat was soon unloaded, but they had some way to carry up the
things.  "We shall not mind such a gale as we had the other day when our
tents are pitched here, William," said Ready, "for we shall be protected
by the whole width of the cocoa-nut grove.  We shall hardly feel the
wind, although we shall the rain, for that will come down in torrents."

"I must go and see how our spring gets on," said William, "and get a
drink from it."

Willy reported the spring to be up to the brim with water, and that he
had never drunk water so excellent.  They then pushed off the boat, and,
after rowing for about two hours or more, found themselves at the
entrance of the cove, and Mrs Seagrave, with Tommy by her side, waving
her handkerchief to them.

They very soon pulled in to the beach, and, landing, received the
congratulations of the whole party at their first successful voyage, and
all expressed their delight at its having proved so much shorter than
had been anticipated.

"Tommy will go next time," said Master Tommy.

"By and by, when Tommy grows a little taller," replied Ready.

"Massa Tommy, you come help me to milk the goats," said Juno.

"Yes, Tommy milk the goats," said the little urchin, running after Juno.

"You must be almost tired of eating nothing but salt meat and biscuit,
ma'am," said Ready, as they sat down to their meal; "but when we are all
safe on the other side of the island we hope to feed you better.  At
present it is hard work and hard fare."

"As long as the children are well, I care very little about it; but I
must say that, after the last gale, I am as anxious as you to be on the
other side of the island, especially after the account William has given
me of it.  It must be a paradise!  When do we set off?"

"Not till the day after to-morrow, ma'am, I should think; for you see I
must have another trip for the cooking utensils and the bundles which
you have made up.  If you will spare Juno to walk through the wood with
William to-morrow, we will then have the tent ready for you and the
children."



