CHAPTER 54.

The following day, being Sunday, was devoted to the usual religious
exercises.  Tommy stole away out of the tent, while Mr Seagrave was
reading a sermon, to have a peep at the turtle-soup, which was boiling
on the fire; however, Juno suspected him, and had hold of him just as he
was taking the lid off the pot.  He was well scolded, and very much
frightened lest he should have no soup for his dinner; however, as it
was not a very heavy offence, he was forgiven.

In the evening, William requested his father to renew the conversation
about the reasoning powers of animals.

"With pleasure, William," replied Mr Seagrave; "it is a fit discourse
for a Sunday evening.  Let us, however, first examine the various mental
faculties discoverable in animals.  In the first place, they have
memory, especially memory of persons and places, quite as tenacious as
our own.  A dog will recognise an old master after many years absence.
An elephant, who had again escaped into the woods, after twenty years
remaining in a wild state, recognised his old mahoot, or driver.  A dog
will find his way back when taken more than a hundred miles from his
master's residence.  Another proof of memory in animals, were it
required, is that they dream.  Now, a dream is a confused recollection
of past events; and how often do you not hear Romulus and Remus
growling, barking, and whining in their sleep!"

"Very true, papa."

"Well, then, they have attention.  See how patiently a cat will remain
for hours before a hole, in watch for the mouse to come out.  A spider
will remain for months watching for the fly to enter its web; but this
quality is to be observed in every animal in the pursuit of its prey.
They have also association of ideas, which is, in fact, reasoning.  A
dog proves that; he will allow a gentleman to come up to the door, but
fly at a beggar.  When he is in charge of any property he will take no
notice of a passer-by; but if a man stops, he barks immediately.  In the
elephant this association of ideas is even more remarkable; indeed, he
understands what is said to him better than any other animal; his
reasoning powers are most extraordinary.  Promise him rewards, and he
will make wonderful exertion.  He is also extremely alive to a sense of
shame.  The elephants were employed to transport the heavy artillery in
India.  One of the finest attempted in vain to force a gun through a
swamp.  `Take away that lazy beast,' said the director `and bring
another.'  The animal was so stung with the reproach, that it used so
much exertion to force the gun on with its head, as to fracture its
skull, and it fell dead.  When Chunee, the elephant which was so long in
Exeter Change, was ordered as usual to take up a sixpence with his
trunk, it happened one day that the sixpence rolled against the
skirting-board, out of his reach.  Chunee stopped, and reflected a
little while, and then, drawing the air into his trunk, he threw it out
with all his force against the skirting-board; the rebound of the air
from the skirting-board blew the sixpence towards him, and he was
enabled to reach it."

"That was very clever of him," replied William.

"Yes; it was a proof of thought, with a knowledge of cause and effect.
There was a curious instance of a horse, which, by the bye, I consider
the most noble animal of creation, which was ridden round by his master,
to deliver newspapers.  He invariably stopped at the doors where papers
were to be left; but it happened that two people, living at different
houses, took in a weekly newspaper between them; and it was agreed, that
one should have the first reading of it on one week, and the other on
the following.  After a short time the horse became accustomed to this
arrangement, and stopped at the one house on the one week, and at the
other house on the following, never making a mistake."

"That was very curious; what a sagacious animal he must have been!"
observed William.

"Animals also are, as you know, capable of receiving instruction, which
is another proof of reasoning powers.  The elephant, the horse, the dog,
the pig, even birds may be taught a great deal."

"But then, papa, I still wish to know where the line is to be drawn
between reason and instinct."

"I was about to come to that very point, William.  When animals follow
their instinct in providing their food, bringing up their young, and in
their precautions against danger, they follow certain fixed rules, from
which they never deviate.  But circumstances may occur against which
their instinct can afford them no regular provision; then it is that
their reasoning powers are called into action.  I will explain this by
stating a fact relative to the bee, one of the animals upon which
instinct is most powerful in its action.  There is a certain large moth,
called the Death's-head moth, which is very fond of honey.  It sometimes
contrives to force its way through the aperture of the hive, and gain an
entrance.  The bees immediately attack it, and it is soon destroyed by
their stings; but the carcass is so large, that they cannot carry it out
of the hive, as they invariably do the bodies of the smaller insects
which may have intruded, and it appears that their sense of smell is
very acute.  What, then, do they do to avoid the stench arising from the
dead body of this large moth?  Why, they embalm it, covering it entirely
with wax, by which it no longer becomes offensive to them."

"But, papa, might not their instinct have provided for such an event?"
observed William.

"If such an event could have occurred to the bees in their wild state,
you certainly might have raised the question; but recollect, William,
that bees in their wild state live in the hollows of trees, and that the
hole by which they enter is never more than sufficiently large to admit
one bee at a time; consequently, no animal larger than a bee could gain
entrance, and if it did, could of course have been easily removed from
the hive; but the bees were here in a new position, in an artificial
state, in a hive of straw with a large aperture, and therefore met with
an exigence they were not prepared for, and acted accordingly."

"Yes, papa, I perceive the difference."

"I will conclude my observations with one remark.  It appears to me,
that although the Almighty has thought proper to vary the intellectual
and the reasoning powers of animals in the same way that he has varied
the species and the forms, yet even in this arrangement he has not been
unmindful of the interest and welfare of man.  For you will observe,
that the reasoning powers are chiefly, if not wholly, given to those
animals which man subjects to his service and for his use--the elephant,
the horse, and the dog; thereby making these animals of more value, as
the powers given to them are at the service and under the control of
man."



