CHAPTER 46.

The subject was introduced to Mrs Seagrave, while they were at
breakfast, and as she perceived how much more secure they would be, she
cheerfully consented.  In less than an hour afterwards, William and
Ready had prepared the boat, and were pulling out among the rocks of the
reef to find a passage, which, after a short time, and by keeping two or
three cables from the point, they succeeded in doing.

"This is very fortunate, William," observed Ready; "but we must now take
some marks to find our way in again.  See, the large black rock is on a
line with the garden point: so, if we keep them in one, we shall know
that we are in the proper channel; and now for a mark abreast of us, to
find out when we enter it."

"Why, Ready, the corner of the turtle-pond just touches the right wall
of the house," replied William.

"So it does; that will do; and now let us pull away as hard as we can,
so as to be back in good time."

They soon were on the south side of the island, and pulling up along the
shore.

"How far do you think that it is by water, Ready?"

"I hardly know; but at least four or five miles, so we must make up our
minds to a good hour's pull.  At all events, we shall sail back again
with this wind, although there is but little of it."

"We are in very deep water now," observed William, after a long silence.

"Yes, on this side of the island we must expect it; the coral grows to
leeward only.  I think that we cannot be very far from the little
harbour we discovered.  Suppose we leave off rowing for a minute, and
look about us."

"There are two rocks close to the shore, Ready," said William, pointing,
"and you recollect there were two or three rocks outside of the
harbour."

"Very true, William, and I should not wonder if you have hit upon the
very spot.  Let us pull in."

They did so; and, to their satisfaction, found that they were in the
harbour, where the water was as smooth as a pond.

"Now, then, William, we will step the mast, and sail back at our
leisure."

"Stop one moment, Ready; give me the boat-hook.  I see something between
the clefts of the rocks."

Ready handed the boat-hook to William, who, lowering it down into the
water, drove the spike of iron at the end of it into a large crayfish,
which he hauled up into the boat.

"That will be an addition to our dinner," said Ready; "we do not go back
empty-handed, and, therefore, as the saying is, we shall be more
welcome; now, then, let us start, for we must pull here again this
afternoon, and with a full cargo on board."

They stepped the mast, and as soon as they had pulled the boat clear of
the harbour, set sail, and in less than an hour had rejoined the party
at the house.

William had brought up the crayfish, which had only one claw, and Juno
put on another pot of water to boil it, as an addition to the dinner,
which was nearly ready.  Tommy at first went with his sister Caroline to
look at the animal, and as soon as he had left off admiring it, he
began, as usual, to tease it; first he poked its eyes with a stick, then
he tried to unfold his tail, but the animal flapped, and he ran away.
At last he was trying to put his stick into the creature's mouth, when
it raised its large claw, and caught him by the wrist, squeezing him so
tight that Tommy screamed and danced about as the crayfish held on.
Fortunately for him, the animal had been so long out of water, and had
been so much hurt by the iron spike of the boat-hook, that it was more
than half-dead, or he would have been severely hurt.  Ready ran to him,
and disengaged the crayfish; but Tommy was so frightened, that he took
to his heels, and did not leave off running until he was one hundred
yards from the house, while Juno and Ready were laughing at him till the
tears came into their eyes.  When he saw the crayfish on the table, he
appeared to be afraid of it, although it was dead.

"Well, Tommy," said Mr Seagrave, "I suppose you won't eat any of the
crayfish?"

"Won't I?" replied Tommy.  "I'll eat him, for he tried to eat me."

"Why did you not leave the animal alone, Tommy?" said Mr Seagrave; "if
you had not tormented it, it would not have bitten you; I don't know
whether you ought to have any."

"I don't like it; I won't have any," replied Tommy.  "I like salt pork
better."

"Well, then, if you don't like it, you shall not have it forced upon
you, Tommy," replied Mr Seagrave; "so now we'll divide it among the
rest of us."

Tommy was not very well pleased at this decision, for he really did wish
to have some of it, so he turned very sulky for the rest of the
dinner-time, especially when old Ready told him that he had had his
share of the crayfish before dinner.



