CHAPTER 17.

Guided by the marks made on the trees, William and Ready made rapid
progress in their return, and in less than two hours found themselves
almost clear of the wood which had taken them nearly eight hours to
force their way through the day before.

"I feel the wind now, Ready," observed William, "and we must be nearly
through the wood; but it appears to me to be very dark."

"I was just thinking the same," replied Ready.  "I should not wonder if
there is a storm brewing up; and if so, the sooner we are back again the
better."

As they proceeded, the rustling and waving of the boughs of the trees,
and ever and anon a gust of wind, followed by a moaning and creaking
sound, proved that such was the fact; and as they emerged from the
grove, they perceived that the sky, as it became visible to them, was of
one dark leaden hue, and no longer of the brilliant blue which it
usually had presented to their sight.

"There is indeed a gale coming on," said Ready, as they cleared the
wood: "let us go on to the tents as fast as possible, for we must see
that all is as secure as we can make it."

The dogs now bounded forward; and at their appearance at the tents Mr
Seagrave and Juno came out, and seeing Ready and William advancing, made
known the welcome tidings to Mrs Seagrave, who, with the children, had
remained within.  In a moment more William was pressed in his mother's
arms.

"I am glad that you are come back, Ready," said Mr Seagrave, shaking
him by the hand after he had embraced William, "for I fear that bad
weather is coming on."

"I am sure of it," replied Ready, "and we must expect a blusterous
night.  This will be one of the storms which are forerunners of the
rainy season.  However, we have good news for you, and must only take
this as a warning to hasten our departure as soon as possible.  We shall
have fine weather after this for a month or so, although we must expect
a breeze now and then.  But we must work hard and do our best; and now,
if you please, you and Juno, William and I, will go and haul up the boat
as far from the beach as we possibly can, for the waves will be high and
run a long way up, and our boat will be our main dependence soon."

The four went down as soon as Ready had sawed the ends of the spars
which had been cut off, into three rollers, to fix under the keel; with
the help afforded by them, the boat was soon hauled up high into the
brushwood, where it was considered by Ready to be perfectly safe.

"I meant to have worked upon her immediately," observed Ready; "but I
must wait now till the gale is over; and I did hope to have got on board
once more, and looked after some things which I have since remembered
would have been useful; but I strongly suspect," continued he, looking
at the weather, "that we shall never go on board of the poor vessel
again.  Hear the moaning of the coming storm, sir; look how the
sea-birds wheel about and scream, as if to proclaim her doom; but we
must not wait here--the tents must be made more secure, for they will
have to hold up against no small force of wind, if I mistake not."

Ready, assisted by Mr Seagrave, now got out some heavy canvas and
lines, and commenced putting it as a double cover over the tents, to
keep out the rain; they also secured the tents with guys and stays of
rope, so as to prevent them being blown down; while Juno with a shovel
deepened the trench which had been made round the tents, so that the
water might run off more easily.  During the time they were at work,
Ready had made Mr Seagrave acquainted with what they had discovered and
done during the exploring expedition, and the adventure with the pigs
made them all laugh heartily.

As the sun went down, the weather threatened still more; the wind blew
strong, and the rocky beach was lashed by the waves and white with
spray, while the surf roared as it poured in and broke upon the sand in
the cove.  The whole family had retired to bed except Ready, who said
that he would watch the weather a little before he turned in.  The old
man walked towards the beach, and leaned against the gunnel of the boat,
and there he remained with his keen grey eye fixed upon the distance,
which was now one opaque mass, except where the white foam of the waters
gleamed through the darkness of the night!  "Yes!" thought he; "the
winds and the waves are summoned to do his bidding, and evenly do they
work together--as one rises, so does the other; when one howls, the
other roars in concert--hand in hand they go in their fury and their
force.  Had they been called up but one week since, where would have
been those who have now been, as it were, intrusted to my weak help?
The father, the mother, the children, the infant at the breast, and I,
the grey-headed old man,--all buried fathoms deep, awaiting our summons;
but they were restrained by his will, and by his will we were saved.
Will those timbers which bore us here so miraculously hold together till
morning?  I should think not.  What are the iron bolts and fastenings of
weak man, compared with the force of God's elements: they will snap as
yarns; and by to-morrow's dawn, the fragments of the stout ship will be
washing and tossing on the wild surf.  Well, it will be a kindness to
us, for the waters will perform the labour which we could not; they will
break up the timbers for our use, and throw on shore from the hold those
articles which we could not reach with our little strength."

A sharp flash of lightning struck upon the old man's eyes, and
obstructed his vision for the moment.  "The storm will soon be at its
height," thought he; "I will watch the tents, and see how they stand up
against its force."  Then the rain came pattering down, and the wind
howled louder than before.  In a minute or two the darkness became so
intense that he could hardly find his way back to the tents.  He turned
round, but could not see, for he was blinded by the heavy rain.  As
nothing could be done, he went into the tent and sheltered himself from
the storm, although he would not lie down, lest his services might be
required.  The others had retired to bed, but with the exception of
Tommy and the children, they had not taken off their clothes.



