CHAPTER 61.

As they could have a very good view of the canoes from where the old
house stood, Ready examined them with his glass every time that he
returned from rolling up a cask to the stockade.  Every one worked hard;
even Mrs Seagrave did all she could, either assisting in rolling the
casks, or carrying up what she was able to lift.  In an hour they had
got into the stockade all that they most cared for, and the canoes were
still about six or seven miles off.

"We have a good hour before they arrive, sir," said Ready, "and even
then the reefs will puzzle them not a little; I doubt if they are
disembarked under two hours.  We have plenty of time for all we wish to
do.  Juno, go for the wheels, and William, come down with the spear, and
we will have some of the turtle into the stockade.  Mr Seagrave, I do
not require your assistance, so if you will have the kindness to get out
the muskets, and examine the flints, it will be as well."

"Yes; and then you have to load them," replied Mrs Seagrave.  "Juno and
I can do that at all events, ready for you to fire them."

"An excellent idea, madam," replied Ready.

In half an hour six turtles were brought up by Juno and William, and
then Ready followed them into the stockade.

They then rolled the casks, and upheaded them by the sides of the
stockade, and fixed up deal planks to stand upon, just high enough to
enable them to see over the top of the palisades, and to fire at the
enemy.  Mrs Seagrave had been shown how to load a musket, and Juno was
now taught the same.

"Now, sir, we are all prepared," said Ready, "and Madam and Juno can go
and look a little after the children, and get breakfast."

As soon as the children were dressed, Mr Seagrave called Ready, who was
outside, watching the canoes, and they went to their morning devotions,
and prayed heartily for succour in this time of need.  They then
breakfasted in haste; for, as may be supposed, they were almost too
anxious to eat.

"This suspense is worse than all," said Mrs Seagrave.  "I wish now that
they were come."

"Shall I go to Ready and hear his report, my dear?--I will not be away
three minutes."

In a short time Mr Seagrave returned, saying that the canoes were close
to the beach, that the savages evidently had a knowledge of the passages
through the reefs, as they had steered right in, and had lowered their
sails; that Ready and William were on the look-out, but concealed behind
the cocoa-nut trees.

"I hope they will not stay out too long."

"No fear of that, my dear Selina; but they had better watch their
motions to the last minute."

During this conversation between Mr and Mrs Seagrave within the
stockade, William and Ready were watching the motions of the savages, a
large portion of whom had landed out of ten of the canoes, and the
others were following their example as fast as they could, forcing their
way through the reefs.  The savages were all painted, with their
war-cloaks and feathers on, and armed with spears and clubs, evidently
having come with no peaceable intentions.

William, who had taken the telescope to examine them more minutely, said
to Ready, "What a fierce, cruel set of wretches they appear to be; if
they overpower us they will certainly kill us!"

"Of that there is no doubt, William; but we must fight hard, and not let
them overpower us.  Kill us they certainly will, and I am not sure that
they may not eat us afterwards; but that is of little consequence."

William replied in a determined tone, "I'll fight as long as I have
breath in my body; but, Ready, they are coming up as fast as they can."

"Yes; we must wait no longer.  Come, William."

"I thought I saw another vessel under sail, out away by the garden
point, Ready, just as we turned away."

"Very likely, sir, a canoe which has separated from the others during
the night.  Come, quick, William, they have begun to yell."

Another half-minute, and they arrived at the door of the stockade; they
entered, shut the door, and then barricaded it with the cocoa-nut poles
which they had fitted to the inner door-posts.



