CHAPTER 24.

The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Mr Seagrave observed:
"Now that we have so many things to do, I think, Ready, we ought to lay
down a plan of operations; method is everything when work is to be done:
now tell me what you propose shall be our several occupations for the
next week, for to-morrow is Sunday; and although we have not yet been
able to honour the day as we should, I think that now we must and ought
to keep it holy."

"Yes, sir," replied Ready.  "To-morrow we will rest from our labour, and
ask God's blessing upon our endeavours during the six days of the week;
and now, as to your proposition, Mr Seagrave, shall we begin first with
the lady?"

"You must not consider that you have ladies with you now, Ready," said
Mrs Seagrave, "at least, not fine ladies.  My health and strength are
recovering fast, and I mean to be very useful.  I propose to assist Juno
in all the domestic duties, such as the cookery and washing, to look
after and teach the children, mend all the clothes, and make all that is
required, to the best of my ability.  If I can do more I will."

"I think we may be satisfied with that, Mr Seagrave," replied Ready.
"Now, sir, the two most pressing points, with the exception of building
the house, are to dig up a piece of ground, and plant our potatoes and
seeds; and to make a turtle-pond, so as to catch the turtle and put them
in before the season is over."

"You are right," replied Mr Seagrave; "but which ought to be done
first?"

"I should say the turtle-pond, as it will be only a few days' work for
you, Juno, and William.  I shall not want your assistance for this next
week.  I shall fix upon some spot, not far from here, where the trees
are thickest in the grove, and cut them down so as to clear out a space
in which we will, by and by, build our storerooms; and, as soon as the
rainy season has gone by, we can remove all our stores from the other
side of the island.  It will occupy me the whole of the week, cutting
down the trees and sawing them into proper lengths, ready for building
the house, and then we must all join our strength and get it up without
delay."

"Can you really manage to get it up in time?  How soon do you expect the
rains will come on?"

"In three or four weeks.  After next week, I shall probably have the
assistance of two of you, if not of all.  Now I think of it, I must
return to the cove."

"What for?"

"Don't you recollect, sir, your two-wheeled carriage, packed up in
matting, which was thrown on shore in the gale?  You laughed when you
saw it, and said it would be of little use now; but the wheels and axle
will be very useful, as we can make a wide path to the place when I cut
down the trees, and wheel out the logs much more easily than we can drag
or carry them."

"That is an excellent idea.  It will save a great deal of labour."

"I expect that it will, sir.  William and I will go away early on Monday
morning, and be back before breakfast.  To-day we will fix upon the
spots where our garden is to be, our turtle-pond to be made, and the
trees to be cut down.  That shall be our business, Mr Seagrave; and
William and Juno may put things a little more to rights here."

Mr Seagrave and Ready then walked down to the beach, and, after
surveying the reefs for some time, Ready said, "You see, Mr Seagrave,
we do not want too much water for a turtle-pond, as, if it is too deep,
there is a difficulty in catching them when we want them: what we want
is a space of water surrounded by a low wall of stones, so that the
animals cannot escape, for they cannot climb up, although they can walk
on the shelving sand with their flippers.  Now the reef here is high out
of the water, and the space within the reef and the beach is deep
enough, and the rocks on the beach nearly fill up that side and prevent
them crawling away by the shore.  We have, therefore, little more to do
than to fill up the two other sides, and then our pond will be
complete."

"I see it will not be a long job either, if we can find loose rocks
enough," replied Mr Seagrave.

"Almost all those which are on the beach are loose," replied Ready, "and
there are plenty close to us: some of them will be too heavy to carry,
but they can be brought here by the aid of handspikes and crowbars.
Suppose we make a signal for William and Juno, and set them to work."

Mr Seagrave called and waved his hat, and Juno and William came down to
them.  Juno was ordered to go back for two handspikes, while Ready
explained to William what was to be done.  Having stayed with them and
assisted them for some time after Juno had returned with the implements,
Mr Seagrave and Ready proceeded to the point, to fix upon a spot for a
garden, leaving William and Juno to continue their labour.



