CHAPTER 6.

Mr Seagrave and William went down below into the cabin, where they
found that there was plenty of employment; the steward had brought a
basin of very hot pea-soup for the children.  Tommy, who was sitting up
in the bed-place with his sister, had snatched it out of Juno's left
hand, for she held the baby with the other, and in so doing, had thrown
it over Caroline, who was screaming, while Juno, in her hurry to assist
Caroline, had slipped down on the deck with the baby, who was also
crying with fright, although not hurt.  Unfortunately, Juno had fallen
down upon Vixen the terrier, who in return had bitten her in the leg,
which had made Juno also cry out; while Mrs Seagrave was hanging her
head out of her standing bed-place, frightened out of her wits at the
accident, but unable to be of any assistance.  Fortunately, Mr Seagrave
came down just in time to pick up Juno and the baby, and then tried to
comfort little Caroline, who after all was not much scalded, as the soup
had had time to cool.

"Massa Tommy is a very naughty boy," cried Juno, rubbing her leg.
Master Tommy thought it better to say nothing--he was duly admonished--
the steward cleaned up the mess, and order was at length restored.

In the meantime, they were not idle upon deck; the carpenter was busy
fixing a step for one of the spare topmasts instead of a mainmast, and
the men were fitting the rigging; the ship unfortunately had sprung a
leak, and four hands at the pumps interfered very much with their task.
As Ready had prophesied, before night the gale blew, the sea rose again
with the gale, and the leaking of the vessel increased so much, that all
other labour was suspended for that at the pump.  For two more days did
the storm continue, during which time the crew were worn out with
fatigue--they could pump no longer: the ship, as she rolled, proved that
she had a great deal of water in her hold--when, melancholy as were
their prospects already, a new disaster took place, which was attended
with most serious results.  Captain Osborn was on the forecastle giving
some orders to the men, when the strap of the block which hoisted up the
main-topgallant yard on the stump of the foremast gave way, the yard and
sail came down on the deck, and struck him senseless.  As long as
Captain Osborn commanded them, the sailors had so high an opinion of his
abilities as a seaman, and were so encouraged by his cheerful
disposition, that they performed their work well and cheerfully; but now
that he was, if not killed, at all events senseless and incapable of
action, they no longer felt themselves under control.  Mackintosh was
too much disliked by the seamen to allow his words to have any weight
with them.  They were regardless of his injunctions or requests, and
they now consulted among themselves.

"The gale is broke, my men, and we shall have fine weather now,"
observed Ready, going up to the sailors on the forecastle.  "The wind is
going down fast."

"Yes," replied one of the men, "and the ship is going down fast, that's
quite as certain."

"A good spell at the pumps would do us some good now," replied Ready.
"What d'ye say, my lads?"

"A glass of grog or two would do us more," replied the seaman.  "What
d'ye say, my boys?  I don't think that the captain would refuse us, poor
fellow, if he could speak."

"What do you mean to do, my lads?" inquired Mackintosh: "not get drunk,
I hope?"

"Why not?" observed another of the men; "the ship must go down soon."

"Perhaps she may--I will not deny it," said Mackintosh; "but that is no
reason why we should not be saved: now, if you get drunk, there is no
chance of any one being saved, and my life is precious to me.  I'm ready
to join with you in anything you please, and you may decide what is to
be done; but get drunk you shall not, if I can help it, that's certain."

"And how can you help it?" replied one of the seamen, surlily.

"Because two resolute men can do a great deal--I may say three, for in
this instance Ready will be of my side, and I can call to my assistance
the cabin passenger--recollect the firearms are all in the cabin.  But
why should we quarrel?--Say at once what you intend to do; and if you
have not made up your minds, will you listen to what I propose?"

As Mackintosh's courage and determination were well known, the seamen
again consulted together, and then asked him what he proposed.

"We have one good boat left, the new yawl at the booms: the others, as
you know, are washed away, with the exception of the little boat astern,
which is useless, as she is knocked almost to pieces.  Now we cannot be
very far from some of the islands, indeed I think we are among them now.
Let us fit out the boat with everything we require, go about our work
steadily and quietly, drink as much grog as will not hurt us, and take a
good provision of it with us.  The boat is complete with her masts,
sails, and oars; and it's very hard if we do not save ourselves
somewhere.  Ready, do I give good advice or not?"

"You give very good advice, Mackintosh--only what is to become of the
cabin passengers, the women, and children? and are you going to leave
poor Captain Osborn? or what do you mean to do?"

"We won't leave the captain," said one of the seamen.

"No--no!" exclaimed the others.

"And the passengers?"

"Very sorry for them," replied the former spokesman; "but we shall have
enough to do to save our own lives."

"Well, my lads, I agree with you," said Mackintosh.  "Charity begins at
home.  What do you say?--shall it be so?"

"Yes," replied the seamen, unanimously; and Ready knew that it was in
vain to expostulate.  They now set about preparing the boat, and
providing for their wants.  Biscuits, salt pork, two or three small
casks of water, and a barrel of rum were collected at the gangway;
Mackintosh brought up his quadrant and a compass, some muskets, powder
and shot; the carpenter, with the assistance of another man, cut away
the ship's bulwarks down to the gunnel, so as to enable them to launch
the boat overboard, for they could not, of course, hoist her out now
that the masts were gone.  In an hour everything was prepared.  A long
rope was made fast to the boat, which was brought to the gunnel ready
for launching overboard, and the ship's broadside was brought to the
wind.  As this was done, Mr Seagrave came on deck and looked around
him.

He perceived the boat ready for launching, the provisions and water at
the gangway, the ship brought to the wind, and rolling slowly to the
heave of the sea; at last he saw Ready sitting down by Captain Osborn,
who was apparently dead.  "What is all this, Ready?" inquired Seagrave.
"Are they going to leave the ship? have they killed Captain Osborn?"

"No, sir,--not quite so bad as that.  Poor Captain Osborn was struck
down by the fall of the yard, and has been insensible ever since; but,
as to the other matter, I fear that is decided: you see they are
launching the boat."

"But my poor wife, she will never be able to go--she cannot move--she is
so ill!"

"I'm afraid, Mr Seagrave, that they have no idea of taking either you,
or your wife, or your children, with them."

"What! leave us here to perish!  Merciful Heaven! how cruel--how
barbarous!"

"It is not kind, Mr Seagrave, but still you see it is the law of
nature.  When it is a question of life, it is every one for himself, for
life is sweet: they are not more unkind than they would be to each
other, if there were too many for the boat to hold.  I've seen all this
before in my time," replied Ready, gravely.

"My wife! my children!" cried Mr Seagrave, covering his face with his
hands.  "But I will speak to them," continued he after a pause; "surely
they will listen to the dictates of humanity; at all events Mr
Mackintosh will have some power over them.  Don't you think so, Ready?"

"Well, Mr Seagrave, if I must speak, I confess to you that there is not
a harder heart among them than that of Mr Mackintosh, and it's useless
speaking to him or any one of them; and you must not be too severe upon
them neither: the boat is small, and could not hold more people with the
provisions which they take with them--that is the fact.  If they were to
take you and your family into the boat, it might be the cause of all
perishing together; if I thought otherwise I would try what I could do
to persuade them, but it is useless."

"What must be done, then, Ready?"

"We must put our trust in a merciful God, Mr Seagrave, who will dispose
of us as he thinks fit."

"We must?  What! do not you go with them?"

"No, Mr Seagrave.  I have been thinking about it this last hour, and I
have made up my mind to remain with you.  They intend to take poor
Captain Osborn with them, and give him a chance, and have offered to
take me; but I shall stay here."

"To perish?" replied Mr Seagrave, with surprise.

"As God pleases, Mr Seagrave.  I am an old man, and it is of little
consequence.  I care little whether I am taken away a year or two
sooner, but I do not like to see blossoms cut off in early spring: I may
be of use if I remain, for I've an old head upon my shoulders, and I
could not leave you all to perish when you might be saved if you only
knew how to act.  But here the seamen come--the boat is all ready, and
they will now take poor Captain Osborn with them."

The sailors came aft, and lifted up the still insensible captain.  As
they were going away one of them said, "Come, Ready, there's no time to
lose."

"Never mind me, Williams; I shall stick to the ship," replied Ready.  "I
wish you success with all my heart; and, Mr Mackintosh, I have but one
promise to exact from you, and I hope you will not refuse me: which is,
that if you are saved, you will not forget those you leave here on
board, and take measures for their being searched for among the
islands."

"Nonsense, Ready! come into the boat," replied the first mate.

"I shall stay here, Mr Mackintosh; and I only beg that you will promise
me what I ask.  Acquaint Mr Seagrave's friends with what has happened,
and where it is most likely we may be found, if it please God to save
us.  Do you promise me that?"

"Yes, I do, if you are determined to stay; but," continued he, going up
to Ready, and whispering to him, "it is madness:--come away, man!"

"Good-bye, Mr Mackintosh," replied Ready, extending his hand.  "You
will keep your promise?"

After much further expostulation on the part of Mackintosh and the
seamen, to which Ready gave a deaf ear, the boat was pushed off, and
they made sail to the north-east.



