CHAPTER 52.

The next morning Tommy's face presented a very woeful appearance.  His
cheek and lips were swelled and black, and the loss of his two front
teeth made him look much worse.

Tommy looked very glum when he came to breakfast.  There was the pig's
fry for breakfast, and the smell of it had been very inviting to Tommy;
but when his father scolded him, and told him that he was not to have
one bit of the pig, he began to cry and roar so loud, that he was sent
away from the tents till he had left off.

After breakfast, Ready proposed that he and William should take the
boat, and begin their labour of carrying the articles round from the
cove to the bay where the house was, pointing out that there was not a
day to be lost.  Juno had, at his request, already baked a large piece
of the pig for them to take with them, and boiled a piece of salt pork,
so that they were all ready to start.

"But, Ready," said Mrs Seagrave, "how long do you intend to remain
absent with William?"

"Why, madam, this is Wednesday; of course we shall be back on Saturday
night."

"My dear William, I cannot bear the idea of your being absent so long,
and as you will be on the water every day, I shall be in a continual
fright until I see you again."

"Well, mamma, I suppose I must write by the penny post, to let you know
how I am."

"Don't laugh at me, William.  I do wish there was a penny post, and that
you could write every day."

Ready and William made every preparation for a continued absence.  They
took their blankets with them, and a small pot for cooking, and when all
was prepared they bade Mr and Mrs Seagrave farewell.  They were now to
pull to the bay, and leave their luggage, and then go round to the cove.
As they shoved off, William took the dog Remus into the boat.

"Why do you take the dog, William? he will be of use here in keeping the
pigs away, but of no use to us."

"Yes, he will, Ready; I must take him; for I have an idea come into my
head, so let me have my own way."

"Well, William, you can always have your own way, as far as I'm
concerned; if you wish to take the dog, there is an end of the matter."

They hoisted the sail, and as the breeze was fresh, were round to the
bay in a very short time.  They took their provisions and stores up to
the house, and made fast the door, called the fowls, and gave them some
damaged rice which Ready had brought from the cove, and found, to their
great delight, that they had now upwards of forty chickens; some,
indeed, quite grown, and large enough to kill.

They then got into the boat again, and pulled away for the cove; the
wind was fresh, and against them, so they had a long pull; but, as Ready
observed, it was much better that it should be so, as, when the boat was
loaded, they could very quickly sail back again to the bay.

As soon as they arrived at the cove, they lost no time in loading the
boat; the nails, and iron work of every description, with the twine and
tools, composed the major part of the first cargo; and calling Remus,
who was lying on the sandy beach, they shoved off, hoisted their sail,
and in an hour had regained the bay, and passed through the reef.

"I am glad that this cargo has arrived safe, William, for it is very
valuable to us.  Now we will take them all up, and that will be
sufficient for to-day; to-morrow, if we can, we will make two trips."

"We can, if we start early," replied William; "but now let us have our
dinner, and carry the remainder of the things up afterwards."

As they were eating their dinner, and William was giving the bones to
the dog, Ready said, "Pray, William, what was the idea in your head
which made you bring Remus with you?"

"I will tell you, Ready; I mean him to carry a letter to mamma; you know
that he always goes back when he is ordered, and now I wish to see if he
will not go back to the tents, if he is told.  I have brought a piece of
paper and pencil with me."

William then wrote on the paper:

"Dear Mamma:--We are quite well, and just returned with the first cargo
quite safe.  Your affectionate son, WILLIAM."

William tied the paper round the dog's neck with a piece of twine, and
then calling him out of the house, said to him, "Remus, go back, sir--go
back, sir;" the dog looked wistfully at William, as if not sure of what
he was to do, but William took up a stone, and pretended to throw it at
the dog, who ran away a little distance, and then stopped.

"_Go back_, Remus--_go back_, sir."  William again pretended to throw
the stone, repeating the order, and then the dog set off as fast as his
legs could carry him through the cocoa-nut grove.

"He is gone at all events," said William; "I think he will go home."

"We shall see, sir," replied Ready; "and now that we have finished our
dinner, we will bring up the things, and put them in the storehouse."



