CHAPTER 29.

Ready had cut out and prepared the door-posts and window-frames from
timber which he had towed round from the cove.  He now fixed four poles
in the earth upright at each corner, and then, with the assistance of
Mr Seagrave, notched every log of cocoa-nut wood on both sides, where
it was to meet with the one crossing it, so that, by laying log upon log
alternately, they fitted pretty close, and had only to have the chinks
between them filled in with cocoa-nut leaves twisted very tight, and
forced between them: this was the work of William and Juno when no more
logs were ready for carrying; and, by degrees, the house rose up from
its foundation.  The fireplace could not be made at once, as they had
either to find clay, or to burn shells into lime and build it up with
rocks and mortar; but a space was left for it.  For three weeks they
worked very hard: as soon as the sides were up, they got on the whole of
the roof and rafters; and then, with the broad leaves of the cocoa-nut
trees which had been cut down, Ready thatched it very strong and
securely.  At the end of the three weeks the house was secure from the
weather; and it was quite time, for the weather had begun to change, the
clouds now gathered thick, and the rainy season was commencing.

"We have no time to lose, sir," said Ready to Mr Seagrave.  "We have
worked hard, but we must for a few days work harder still.  We must fit
up the inside of the house, so as to enable Madam to get into it as soon
as possible."

The earth in the inside of the house was then beaten down hard, so as to
make a floor; and a sort of bedstead, about two feet from the ground,
running the whole length of the house, was raised on each side of the
interior: these were fitted with canvas screens to let down by night.
And then Ready and William took the last trip in the boat to fetch the
chairs and tables, which they did just before the coming on of the first
storm of the season.  The bedding and all the utensils were now taken
into the house; and a little outhouse was built up to cook in, until the
fireplace could be made.

It was late on the Saturday night that the family shifted into the new
house; and fortunate it was that they had no further occasion for delay,
for on the Sunday the first storm burst upon them; the wind blew with
great force; and, although they were shielded from it, still the
cocoa-nut trees ground and sawed each other's stems as they bent their
heads to its force.  The lightning was vivid, and the thunder appalling,
while the rain descended in a continual torrent.  The animals left the
pastures, and sheltered themselves in the grove; and, although noonday,
it was so dark that they could not see to read.

"This, then, is the rainy season which you talked about, Ready," said
Mrs Seagrave.  "Is it always like this?  If so, what shall we do?"

"No, madam; the sun will shine sometimes, but not for long at a time.
We shall be able to get out and do something every now and then almost
every day, but still we shall have rain, perhaps, for many days without
intermission, and we must work indoors."

"How thankful we ought to be that we have a house over our heads; we
should have been drowned in the tents."

"That I knew, madam, and therefore I was anxious to get a house over
your head; let us thank God for it."

"Indeed we ought," observed Mr Seagrave; "and it is, indeed, time for
us to read the service."

The morning service was then performed in the new house.  Violent as the
rain was, it did not penetrate through the thatch which had been put on.
Ready and William went out to secure the boat, which they were afraid
would be injured, and returned wet to the skin.  The storm continued
without intermission the whole of the night, but they slept dry and
safe; and, when awakened by the noise of the thunder and the pelting of
the rain, they thanked God that they had found a dwelling in the
wilderness upon which they had been cast.



