CHAPTER 41.

For several days after, they were employed in clearing away the stumps
of the cocoa-nut trees in the winding path to the storehouse; and as
soon as that work was finished, Ready put up a lightning-conductor at
the side of the storehouse, like the one which he had put up near to the
cottage.  They had now got through all the work that they had arranged
to do during the rainy season.  The ewes had lambed, but both the sheep
and the goats began to suffer for want of pasture.  For a week they had
no rain, and the sun burst out very powerfully; and Ready was of opinion
that the rainy season was now over.  William had become quite strong
again, and he was very impatient that they should commence the survey of
the island.  After a great deal of consultation, it was at last settled,
that Ready and William should make the first survey to the southward,
and then return and report what they had discovered.  This was decided
upon on the Saturday evening, and on the Monday morning they were to
start.  The knapsacks were got ready, and well filled with boiled salt
pork, and flat cakes of bread.  They were each to have a musket and
ammunition, and a blanket was folded up to carry on the shoulders, that
they might sleep on it at night.  Ready did not forget his compass, or
the small axes, for them to blaze the trees as they went through the
wood.

The whole of Saturday was occupied in making their preparations.  After
supper, Ready said, "Now, William, before we start on our travels, I
think I may as well wind up my history.  I haven't a great deal more to
tell, as my good fortune did not last long; and after my remaining so
long in a French prison, my life was one continued chapter of from bad
to worse.  Our ship was soon ready, and we sailed with convoy for
Barbadoes.  Sanders proved a good navigator, and from him, before we
arrived at Barbadoes, I gained all the knowledge which I required to
enable me to command and navigate my vessel.  Sanders attempted to renew
our serious conversation, but my property had made me vain; and now that
I felt I could do without his assistance, I not only kept him at a
distance, but assumed the superior.  This was a very ungrateful return
for his kindness to me; but it is too often the case in this world.
Sanders was very much annoyed, and on our arrival at Barbadoes, he told
me that it was his intention to quit the vessel.  I replied very
haughtily, that he might do as he pleased; the fact is, I was anxious to
get rid of him, merely because I was under obligations to him.  Well,
sir, Sanders left me, and I felt quite happy at his departure.  My ship
was soon with a full cargo of sugar on board of her, and we waited for
convoy to England.  When at Barbadoes, I had an opportunity to buy four
brass guns, which I mounted on deck, and had a good supply of ammunition
on board.  I was very proud of my vessel, as she had proved in the
voyage out to be a very fast sailer: indeed, she sailed better than some
of the men-of-war which convoyed us; and now that I had guns on board, I
considered myself quite safe from any of the enemies' privateers.  While
we were waiting for convoy, which was not expected for a fortnight, it
blew a very heavy gale, and my ship, as well as others, dragged their
anchors, and were driven out of Carlisle Bay.  We were obliged to make
sail to beat into the bay again, it still blowing very fresh.  What with
being tired waiting so long for convoy, and the knowledge that arriving
before the other West Indiamen would be very advantageous, I made up my
mind that, instead of beating up into the bay again, I would run for
England without protection, trusting to the fast sailing of my vessel
and the guns which I had on board.  I forgot at the time that the
insurance on the vessel was made in England as `sailing with convoy,'
and that my sailing without would render the insurance void, if any
misfortune occurred.  Well, sir, I made sail for England, and for three
weeks everything went on well.  We saw very few vessels, and those which
did chase us could not come up with us; but as we were running with a
fair wind up channel, and I had made sure of being in port before night,
a French privateer hove in sight and gave chase.  We were obliged to
haul our wind, and it blowing very fast, we carried away our main-top
mast.  This accident was fatal; the privateer came alongside of us and
laid us by the board, and that night I was in a French prison, and, I
may say, a pauper; for the insurance of the vessel was void, from my
having sailed without convoy.  I felt that I had no one to thank but
myself for the unfortunate position I was in; at all events, I was
severely punished, for I remained a prisoner for nearly six years.  I
contrived to escape with three or four others; we suffered dreadfully,
and at last arrived in England, in a Swedish vessel, without money, or
even clothes that would keep out the weather.  Of course, I had nothing
to do but to look out for a berth on board of a ship, and I tried for
that of second mate, but without success; I was too ragged and looked
too miserable; so I determined, as I was starving, to go before the
mast.  There was a fine vessel in the port; I went on board to offer
myself; the mate went down to the captain, who came on deck, and who
should he be but Sanders?  I hoped that he would not remember me, but he
did immediately, and held out his hand.  I never did feel so ashamed in
my life as I did then.  Sanders perceived it, and asked me down into the
cabin.  I then told him all that had happened, and he appeared to forget
that I had behaved so ill to him; he offered me a berth on board, and
money in advance to fit me out.  But if he would not remember my
conduct, I could not forget it, and I told him so, and begged his
forgiveness.  Well, sir, that good man, as long as he lived, was my
friend.  I became his second mate before he died, and we were again very
intimate.  My misfortunes had humbled me, and I once more read the Bible
with him; and I have, I trust, done so ever since.  When he died, I
continued second mate for some time, and then was displaced.  Since
that, I have always been as a common seaman on board of different
vessels; but I have been well treated and respected, and I may add, I
have not been unhappy, for I felt that property would have only led me
into follies, and have made me forget, that in this world we are to live
so as to prepare ourselves for another.  Now, William, you have the
history of Masterman Ready; and I hope that there are portions of it
which may prove useful to you.  To-morrow we must be off betimes, and as
we are all to breakfast early together, why, I think the sooner we go to
bed the better."

"Very true," replied Mr Seagrave, "William, dear, bring me the Bible."



