CHAPTER 48.

The boat was well loaded that afternoon, and they had a heavy pull
round, and hard work afterwards to carry all the articles up.  William
and Ready were, therefore, not sorry when their work was done, and they
went to bed as soon as they had taken their supper.

At sunrise, they went back to the bay in the boat, which they hauled up,
and then proceeded to the house, where they found that everyone was
ready to start.  Mr Seagrave had collected all the animals, and they
set off; the marks on the trees were very plain, and they had no
difficulty in finding their way; but they had a good deal of trouble
with the goats and sheep, and did not get on very fast.  It was three
hours before they got clear of the cocoa-nut grove, and Mrs Seagrave
was quite tired out.  At last they arrived, and Mr and Mrs Seagrave
could not help exclaiming "How beautiful!"

When they came to where the tents were pitched by the side of the
bananas, they were equally pleased: it was quite a fairy spot.  Mrs
Seagrave went into her tent to repose after her fatigue; the goats and
sheep were allowed to stray away as they pleased; the dogs lay down,
panting with their long journey; Juno put Albert on the bed while she
went with William to collect fuel to cook the dinner; Ready went to the
pits to get some water, while Mr Seagrave walked about, examining the
different clumps of trees with which the meadow was studded.

When Ready returned with the water, he called the dogs, and went back
towards the yam plantation.  Tommy followed them; the dogs went into the
yams, and were soon barking furiously, which pleased Tommy very much;
when, of a sudden, out burst again in a drove all the pigs, followed by
the dogs, and so close to Tommy that he screamed with fright, and
tumbled head over heels.

"I thought you were there, my gentlemen," said Ready, looking after the
pigs; "the sooner we fence you out the better."

The pigs scampered away, and went into the cocoa-nut grove as they had
done before.  The dogs followed the pigs, and did not return for a long
while afterwards.

It was late before the dinner was ready, and they were all very glad to
go early to bed.

At day dawn, William and Ready had again started, and walked through the
cocoa-nut grove back to the house, to bring round in the boat the
articles of furniture and the clothes which had been left.  Having
collected everything in the house, and procured some more pork and flour
from the storehouse, they completed the load by spearing one of the
turtles which remained, and putting it into the bottom of the boat; they
then set off again for their new residence, and arrived in time for
breakfast.

"What a delightful spot this is!" said Mrs Seagrave.  "I think we ought
always to make it our summer residence, and only go back to the house
during the rainy season."

"It is much cooler here, madam, during the summer, and much more
pleasant; but we are more protected in the house by the cocoa-nut
grove."

"Yes; that is true, and it is very valuable during the rainy season; but
it makes it warmer in the summer time.  I like the change, Ready, and
shall be sorry when we have to go back again."

"Now I must go, and help Juno to cut up the turtle," said Ready.  "We
must make our larder among the banana trees."

"But what are we all to do, Ready?" said Mr Seagrave.  "We must not be
idle."

"No, sir; but I think we must give up this day to putting everything to
rights, and making everything comfortable inside the tents; to-morrow we
will commence the ditch and hedge round the yam plantation.  We need not
work very hard at it, for I don't think the pigs will venture here
again, as I mean to tie up all the dogs round the yam patch every night,
and their barking will keep them off."

"That will be a very good plan, Ready.  What beautiful food there is for
the sheep and goats!"

"Yes; this must be their future residence for the best part of the year.
I think to-morrow we will begin a piece of the ditch, and show William
how to put in the cuttings of prickly pear for the hedge, and then, I
should propose that you and I go to the cove to examine the stores and
select what it will be necessary to bring round.  I think you said that
you must go yourself?"

"Yes, Ready, I wish to go.  When we have made our selection, I will
return, and then you and William, who is more used to the boat than I
am, can bring the stores round.  I presume we shall not bring them
here?"

"No, sir, we will take them round to the storehouse.  When we have done
that job, we must then commence our alterations and our stockade."



