CHAPTER 21.

Old Ready had his boat loaded and had made sail for the other side of
the island long before the family were up; indeed, before they were
dressed he had landed his whole cargo on the beach, and was sitting down
quietly taking his breakfast.  As soon as he had eaten the beef and
biscuit which he had taken with him, he carried up the things which he
had brought, and commenced arrangements for setting up the tent,
intending to await the arrival of William and Juno, that they might
assist him in getting up the spars and canvas over it.

About ten o'clock William made his appearance, leading one of the goats
by a string, followed by the others.  Juno came after with the sheep,
also holding one with a cord; the rest had very quietly joined the
procession.  "Here we are at last!" said William laughing; "we have had
terrible work in the woods, for Nanny would run on one side of a tree
when I went on the other, and then I had to let go the string.  We fell
in with the pigs again, and Juno gave such a squall!"

"I tink 'em wild beast," said Juno.  "Ah! what a nice place!  Missis
will like to live here."

"Yes, it is a very nice place, Juno; and you'll be able to wash here,
and never mind about saving the water."

"I am thinking," said William, "how we are to get the fowls here; they
are not very wild, but still we cannot catch them."

"I'll bring them with me to-morrow, William."

"But how will you catch them?"

"Wait till they are gone to roost, and then you may catch them when you
please."

"And I suppose the pigeons and the pigs must run wild?"

"The best thing we can do with them."

"Then we shall have to shoot them, I suppose?"

"Well, William, so we shall; and the pigeons also, when they have become
plentiful, if we remain here so long.  We shall soon be well stocked and
live in plenty.  But now you must help me to get the tent up and
everything in order, so that your mamma may find things comfortable on
her arrival, for she will be very tired, I dare say, walking through the
wood."

"Mamma is much better than she was," replied William.  "I think she will
soon be quite strong again, especially when she comes to live at this
beautiful place."

"We have a great deal of work to do, more than we can get through before
the rainy season; which is a pity, but it can't helped; by this time
next year we shall be more comfortable."

"Why, what have we to do besides putting up the tents and shifting over
here?"

"In the first place we have to build a house, and that will take a long
while.  Then we ought to make a little garden, and sow the seeds which
your father brought from England with him."

"Oh! that will be nice; where shall we make it, Ready?"

"We must put a fence across that point of land, and dig up all the
brushwood; the mould is very good."

"Then what next?"

"Then we shall want a storehouse for all the things we have got, and all
that are in the wood and on the beach: and consider what a many trips we
shall have to make with the little boat to bring them all round."

"Yes, that is very true, Ready.  Have we anything more to do?"

"Plenty; we have to build a turtle-pond and a fish-pond, and a
bathing-place for Juno to wash the children in.  But first we must make
a proper well at the spring, so as to have plenty of fresh water: now
there's enough for a year's hard work at least."

"Well, let us once get mamma and the children here, and we will work
hard."

"I should wish very much to see it all done, William," said Ready.  "I
hope my life will be spared till it is done, at all events."

"But why do you say that, Ready? you are an old man, but you are strong
and healthy."

"I am so now; but what does the Book say?--`In the midst of life we are
in death.'  You are young and healthy, and promise a long life; but who
knows but you may be summoned away tomorrow.  Can I, then, an old man,
worn out with hardships, expect to live long?  No--no, William!  Still I
should like to remain here as long as I can be useful, and then I trust
I may depart in peace.  I never wish to leave this island; and I have a
kind of feeling that my bones will remain on it.  God's will be done!"

For some time after Ready had finished, neither of them said a word, but
continued their employment, stretching out the canvas of the tent, and
fastening it down to the ground with pegs.  At last William broke the
silence.

"Ready, did you not say your Christian name was Masterman?"

"So it is, William."

"It is a very odd Christian name!  You were called after some other
person?"

"Yes, I was, William; he was a very rich man."

"Do you know, Ready, I should like very much if you will one day tell me
your history--I mean your whole life, from the time you were a boy."

"Well, perhaps I may, William; for there are many parts of my life which
would prove a lesson to others: but that must be after we have got
through our work."

"How old are you, Ready?"

"I am turned of sixty-four; a very old age for a seaman.  I could not
obtain employment on board of a vessel if it were not that I am well
known to several captains."

"But why do you say `old for a seaman?'"

"Because sailors live faster than other people, partly from the
hardships which they undergo, and partly from their own fault in
drinking so much spirits; and then they are too often reckless and care
nothing for their healths."

"But you never drink spirits now?"

"No, never, William; but in my early days I was as foolish as others.
Now, Juno, you may bring in the bedding.  We have two or three hours
yet, William; what shall we do next?"

"Had we not better make the fireplace all ready for cooking?"

"It was what I was going to propose, if you had not.  I shall be here
to-morrow long before any of you, and I will take care that supper is
ready on your arrival."

"I brought a bottle of water in my knapsack," replied William, "not so
much for the water, as because I want to milk the goats and take back
the milk for baby."

"You proved yourself not only thoughtful but kind, William: now while
you and Juno fetch the stones for the fireplace, I will stow away under
the trees the things I have brought in the boat."

"Shall we let the goats and sheep loose, Ready?"

"Oh, yes,--there is no fear of their straying; the herbage here is
better than on the other side, and there is plenty of it."

"Well, I will let Nanny go as soon as Juno has milked her.  Now, Juno,
let us see how many stones we can carry at once."

In an hour the fireplace was made, Ready had done all that he could, the
goats were milked and let loose, and then William and Juno set off on
their journey back.

Ready went down to the beach.  On his arrival there, he observed a small
turtle: creeping up softly he got between it and the water, and
succeeded in turning it over.  "That will do for to-morrow," said he, as
he stepped into the boat; and laying hold of the oars, he pulled out of
the bay to return to the cove.



