CHAPTER 3.

The next morning the _Pacific_ arrived at the Cape and anchored in Table
Bay.

"Why do they call this Table Bay, Ready?" said William.

"I suppose it's because they call that great mountain the Table
Mountain, Master William; you see how flat the mountain is on the top."

"Yes, it is quite as flat as a table."

"Yes, and sometimes you will see the white clouds rolling down over the
top of it in a very curious manner, and that the sailors call spreading
the tablecloth: it is a sign of bad weather."

"Then I hope they will not spread the tablecloth while we are here,
Ready," said William, "for I shall certainly have no appetite.  We have
had bad weather enough already, and mamma suffers so much from it.  What
a pretty place it is!"

"We shall remain here two days, sir," said Captain Osborn to Mr
Seagrave, "if you and Mrs Seagrave would like to go on shore."

"I will go down and ask Mrs Seagrave," said her husband, who went down
the ladder, followed by William.

Upon the question being put to Mrs Seagrave, she replied that she was
quite satisfied with the ship having no motion, and did not feel herself
equal to going on shore; it was therefore decided that she should remain
on board with the two younger children, and that, on the following day,
Mr Seagrave should take William and Tommy to see Cape Town, and return
on board before night.

The next morning, Captain Osborn lowered down one of the large boats,
and Mr Seagrave, accompanied by Captain Osborn, went on shore with
William and Tommy.  Tommy had promised his mamma to be very good; but
that he always did, and almost always forgot his promise directly he was
out of sight.  As soon as they landed, they went up to a gentleman's
house, with whom Captain Osborn was acquainted.  They stayed for a few
minutes to drink a glass of lemonade, for it was very warm; and then it
was proposed that they should go to the Company's Gardens and see the
wild beasts which were confined there, at which William was much
delighted, and Tommy clapped his hands with joy.

"What are the Company's Gardens, papa?" inquired William.

"They were made by the Dutch East India Company, at the time that the
Cape of Good Hope was in their possession.  They are, properly speaking,
Botanical Gardens; but, at the same time, the wild animals are kept
there.  Formerly there were a great many, but they have not been paid
attention to lately, for we have plenty of these animals in England
now."

"What shall we see?" said Tommy.

"You will see lions, Tommy, a great many in a large den together," said
Captain Osborn.

"Oh!  I want to see a lion."

"You must not go too near them, recollect."

"No, I won't," said Tommy.

As soon as they entered the gates, Tommy escaped from Captain Osborn,
and ran away in his hurry to see the lions; but Captain Osborn caught
him again, and held him fast by the hand.

"Here is a pair of very strange birds," said the gentleman who
accompanied them; "they are called Secretaries, on account of the
feathers which hang behind their heads, as the feather of a pen does
when a clerk puts it behind his ear: but they are very useful, for they
are snake-killers; indeed, they would, if they could, live altogether
upon snakes, which they are very great enemies to, never letting one
escape.  They strike them with their feet, and with such force as to
kill them immediately."

"Are there many snakes in this country?" inquired William.

"Yes, and very venomous snakes," replied Mr Seagrave; "so that these
birds are very useful in destroying them.  You observe, William, that
the Almighty, in his wisdom, has so arranged it that no animal
(especially of a noxious kind) shall be multiplied to excess, but kept
under by being preyed upon by some other; indeed, wherever in any
country an animal exists in any quantity, there is generally found
another animal which destroys it.  The Secretary inhabits this country
where snakes exist in numbers, that it may destroy them: in England the
bird would be of little value."

"But some animals are too large or too fierce to be destroyed by others,
papa; for instance, the elephant and the lion."

"Very true; but these larger animals do not breed so fast, and therefore
their numbers do not increase so rapidly.  For instance, a pair of
elephants will not have more than one young one in the space of two
years or more; while the rabbits, which are preyed upon and the food of
so many other beasts as well as birds, would increase enormously, if
they were not destroyed.  Examine through the whole of creation, and you
will find that there is an unerring hand, which invariably preserves the
balance exact; and that there are no more mouths than for which food is
provided, although accidental circumstances may for a time occasion a
slight alteration."

They continued their walk until they came to the den of the lions.  It
was a large place, in closed with a strong and high wall of stone, with
only one window to it for the visitors to look at them, as it was open
above.  This window was wide, and with strong iron bars running from the
top to the bottom; but the width between the bars was such that a lion
could put his paw out with ease; and they were therefore cautioned not
to go too near.  It was a fine sight to see eight or ten of these
noble-looking animals lying down in various attitudes, quite indifferent
apparently to the people outside--basking in the sun, and slowly moving
their tufted tails to and fro.  William examined them at a respectful
distance from the bars; and so did Tommy, who had his mouth open with
astonishment, in which there was at first not a little fear mixed, but
he soon got bolder.  The gentleman who had accompanied them, and who had
been long at the Cape, was relating to Mr Seagrave and Captain Osborn
some very curious anecdotes about the lion.  William and they were so
interested, that they did not perceive that Tommy had slipped back to
the grated window of the den.  Tommy looked at the lions, and then he
wanted to make them move about: there was one fine full-grown young
lion, about three years old, who was lying down nearest to the window;
and Tommy took up a stone and threw it at him: the lion appeared not to
notice it, for he did not move, although he fixed his eyes upon Tommy;
so Tommy became more brave, and threw another, and then another,
approaching each time nearer to the bars of the window.

All of a sudden the lion gave a tremendous roar, and sprang at Tommy,
bounding against the iron bars of the cage with such force that, had
they not been very strong, it must have broken them.  As it was, they
shook and rattled so that pieces of mortar fell from the stones.  Tommy
shrieked; and, fortunately for himself, fell back and tumbled head over
heels, or the lion's paws would have reached him.  Captain Osborn and
Mr Seagrave ran up to Tommy, and picked him up: he roared with fright
as soon as he could fetch his breath, while the lion stood at the bars,
lashing his tail, snarling, and showing his enormous fangs.

"Take me away--take me on board the ship!" cried Tommy, who was terribly
frightened.

"What did you do, Tommy?" said Captain Osborn.

"I won't throw any more stones, Mr Lion; I won't indeed!" cried Tommy,
looking terrified towards the animal.

Mr Seagrave scolded Tommy well for his foolish conduct, and by degrees
he became more composed; but he did not recover himself until they had
walked some distance away from the lion's den.

They then looked at the other animals which were to be seen, Tommy
keeping a most respectful distance from every one of them.  He wouldn't
even go near to a Cape sheep with a broad tail.

When they had seen everything, they went back to the gentleman's house
to dinner; and, after dinner, they returned on board.



