CHAPTER 55.

On the Monday morning, William and Ready went away in the boat, as
before, to bring round the various articles from the cove.  It had been
arranged that they were not to return till the Saturday evening, and
that the dog Remus was to bring intelligence of them and their welfare
every afternoon.  They worked hard during the week, and on Saturday they
had completed their task; with the exception of a portion of the timbers
of the ship, everything had been brought round, but had not been carried
up to the storehouse, as that required more time.

On Saturday morning, they went for the last time to the cove, and Ready
selected some heavy oak timber out of the quantity which was lying on
the beach, part of which they put into the boat, and the remainder they
towed astern.  It was a heavy load, and although the wind was fair to
sail back again to the bay, the boat went but slowly through the water.

"Well, William," said Ready, "we have done a good week's work, and I
must say it is high time that it is done; for the boat is in rather a
crazy condition, and I must contrive to patch her up by and by, when
there is time."

"We shall not want to use her very much after this, Ready," replied
William; "a few trips round to the little harbour will be all that will
be required before we come back again to our old quarters."

"That's true, William; but she leaks very much, and at all events I'll
give her a coat of pitch as soon as possible.  For a slight-built little
thing as she is, she has done hard duty."

"Pray, Ready, why, when you speak of a ship or boat, do you always call
it she?"

"Well, William, I don't know why, but it is certain that we sailors
always do so.  I believe it is because a sailor loves his ship.  His
ship is his wife, is a very common saying with us; and then you see,
Master William, a vessel is almost a thing of life in appearance.  I
believe that's the reason, and of course if a vessel is she, a little
boat must be a she also."

"Well, I think you have explained it very well, Ready.  I suppose on
Monday we shall set to at the storehouse, and alter it for our future
residence?"

"Can't begin too soon, William," replied Ready; "I don't doubt but Mr
Seagrave has finished the hedge and ditch round the yams by this time,
and if so, I expect Madam will not like to be left in the tents alone
with Juno and the children, and so we shall all move back to the house
again until we have altered the storehouse; I must say that I would
rather your mamma remained in the tents until all was finished."

"Because you are afraid of a visit from the savages, Ready?"

"I am, sir, and that's the truth."

"But, Ready, if they do come, we shall see them coming, and would it not
be better that we should all be together, even if we are obliged to
conceal ourselves in consequence of not being prepared?  Suppose the
savages were to overrun the island, and find my mother, my little
brother, and sister, defenceless, at the time we were obliged to retreat
from our house; how dreadful that would be!"

"But I counted upon retreating to the tents."

"So we can all together, unless we are surprised in the night."

"That we must take care not to be.  There's not three hours' dark in
this season of the year.  Well, William, I doubt not you may be right,
and if they are all with us, Juno will be a great help, and we shall get
through our work the faster."

"We had better let the question be decided by my father and mother."

"Very true, William; here's the point at last.  We will haul the timber
on the beach, and then be off as fast as we can, for it is getting
late."

It was, indeed, much later than they had usually arrived at the little
harbour, owing to the heavy load, which made the boat so long in coming
round from the cove; and when they pulled in, they found Mr and Mrs
Seagrave and the children all waiting for them.

"You are very late, William," said Mrs Seagrave.  "I was quite uneasy
till I saw the boat at a distance."

"Yes, mamma; but we could not help it; we had a heavy load to bring
round, and now our work is done."

"I am delighted to hear it, William; for I cannot bear you being away so
long."

"And my work is done," said Mr Seagrave; "the hedge and ditch were
finished this morning."

"Well, then," observed Ready, "we must hold another council, but I
presume it will not take very long."

"No; I expect not; it seldom does when people are of the same mind.
Mrs Seagrave won't be left here, Ready, and I don't want to leave her,
so I presume on Monday we all start home again."

"Yes, sir; if you please," replied Ready.

"Juno, I hope you have a good supper," said William; "for I'm very
hungry."

"Yes, Massa William; plenty fried fish; Massa catch 'em this morning."



