CHAPTER 14.

Ready was up before the sun had appeared, and he awakened William.  The
knapsacks had been already packed, with two bottles of water in each,
wrapped round with cocoa-nut leaves, to prevent their breaking, and the
beef and pork divided between each knapsack.  Ready's, which was larger
than William's, held the biscuit and several other things which Ready
had prepared in case they might require them.

As soon as the knapsacks were on, Ready took the axe and gun, and asked
William if he thought he could carry a small spade on his shoulder,
which they had brought on shore along with the shovels.  William replied
that he could; and the dogs, who appeared to know they were going, were
all ready standing by them.  Then, just as the sun rose, they turned
into the cocoa-nut grove, and were soon out of sight of the tents.

"Now, William, do you know," said Ready, stopping after they had walked
twenty yards, "by what means we may find our way back again; for you see
this forest of trees is rather puzzling, and there is no path to guide
us?"

"No, I am sure I cannot tell; I was thinking of the very same thing when
you spoke; and of Tom Thumb, who strewed peas to find his way back, but
could not do it, because the birds picked them all up."

"Well, Tom Thumb did not manage well, and we must try to do better; we
must do as the Americans always do in their woods,--we must _blaze_ the
trees."

"Blaze them! what, set fire to them?" replied William.

"No, no, William.  Blaze is a term they use when they cut a slice of the
bark off the trunk of a tree, just with one blow of a sharp axe, as a
mark to find their way back again.  They do not _blaze_ every tree, but
about every tenth tree as they go along, first one to the right, and
then one to the left, which is quite sufficient; and it is very little
trouble,--they do it as they walk along, without stopping.  So now we'll
begin: you take the other side, it will be more handy for you to have
your hatchet in your right hand; I can use my left.  See now--just a
slice off the bark--the weight of the axe does it almost."

"What an excellent plan!" observed William.

"But I have another friend in my pocket," replied Ready, "and I must use
him soon."

"What is that?"

"Poor Captain Osborn's pocket-compass.  You see, William, the _blazing_
will direct us how to go back again; but it will not tell us what course
we are now to steer.  At present, I know we are going right, as I can
see through the wood behind us; but by and by we shall not be able, and
then I must make use of the compass."

"I understand that very well; but tell me, Ready, why do you bring the
spade with us--what will be the use of it?  You did not say yesterday
that you were going to bring me."

"No, William, I did not, as I did not like to make your mother anxious;
but the fact is, I am very anxious myself as to whether there is any
water on this island; if there is not, we shall have to quit it sooner
or later, for although we may get water by digging in the sand, it would
be too brackish to use for any time, and would make us all ill.  Very
often there will be water if you dig for it, although it does not show
above-ground; and therefore I brought the spade."

"You think of everything, Ready."

"No, I do not, William; but, in our present situation, I think of more
things than perhaps your father and mother would: they have never known
what it is to be put to their shifts; but a man like me, who has been
all his life at sea, and who has been wrecked, and suffered hardships
and difficulties, and has been obliged to think or die, has a greater
knowledge, not only from his own sufferings, but by hearing how others
have acted when they were in distress.  Necessity sharpens a man's wits;
and it is very curious what people do contrive when they are compelled
to do so, especially seamen."

"And where are we going to now, Ready?"

"Right to the leeward side of the island."

"Why do you call it the leeward side of the island?"

"Because among these islands the winds almost always blow one way; we
landed on the windward side; the wind is at our back; now put up your
finger, and you will feel it even among the trees."

"No, I cannot," replied William, as he held up his finger.

"Then wet your finger, and try again."

William wet his finger, and held it up again.  "Yes, I feel it now,"
said he; "but why is that?"

"Because the wind blows against the wet, and you feel the cold."

As Ready said this the dogs growled, then started forward and barked.

"What can be there?" cried William.

"Stand still, William," replied Ready, cocking his gun, "and I will go
forward to see."  Ready advanced cautiously with the gun to his hip.
The dogs barked more furiously; and at last, out of a heap of cocoa-nut
leaves collected together, burst all the pigs which had been brought on
shore, grunting and galloping away as fast as they could, with the dogs
in pursuit of them.

"It's only the pigs," said Ready, smiling; "I never thought I should be
half-frightened by a tame pig.  Here, Romulus! here, Remus! come back!"
continued Ready, calling to the dogs.  "Well, William, this is our first
adventure."

"I hope we shall not meet with any one more dangerous," replied William,
laughing; "but I must say that I was alarmed."

"No wonder; for, although not likely, it is possible there may be wild
animals on this island, or even savages; but being alarmed is one thing,
and being afraid is another: a man may be alarmed, and stand his ground;
but a man that is afraid will run away."

"I do not think I shall ever run away and leave you, Ready, if there is
danger."

"I'm sure you will not; but still you must not be rash; and now we will
go on again, as soon as I have uncocked my gun.  I have seen more
accidents happen from people cocking their guns, and forgetting to
uncock them afterwards, than you can have any idea of.  Recollect, also,
until you want to fire, never cock your gun."

Ready and William continued their way through the cocoa-nut grove for
more than an hour longer, marking the trees as they went along; they
then sat down to take their breakfast.

"Don't give the dogs any water, William, nor any of the salt meat; give
them biscuit only."

"But they are very thirsty; may not I give them a little?"

"No: we shall want it all ourselves, in the first place; and, in the
next, I wish them to be thirsty.  And, William, take my advice, and only
drink a small quantity of water at a time.  The more you drink, the more
you want."

"Then I should not eat so much salt meat."

"Very true; the less you eat the better, unless we find water, and fill
our bottles again."

"But we have our axes, and can always cut down a cocoa-nut, and get the
milk from the young nuts."

"Very true; and fortunate it is that we have that to resort to; but
still we could not do very well on cocoa-nut milk alone, even if it were
to be procured all the year round.  Now we will go on if you do not feel
tired."

"Not in the least; I am tired of seeing nothing but the stems of
cocoa-nut trees, and shall be glad when we are through the wood."

"Then the faster we walk the better," said Ready; "as far as I can
judge, we must be about half-way across now."

Ready and William recommenced their journey; and, after half-an-hour's
walking, they found that the ground was not so level as it had been--
sometimes they went gradually up hill, at others down.

"I am very glad to find the island is not so flat here; we have a better
chance of finding water."

"It is much steeper before us," replied William; "it's quite a hill."

The ground now became more undulating, although still covered with
cocoa-nut trees, even thicker together than before.  They continued
their march, occasionally looking at the compass, until William showed
symptoms of weariness, for the wood had become more difficult to get
through than at first.

"How many miles do you think we have walked, Ready?" said Willy.

"About eight, I should think."

"Not more than eight?"

"No; I do not think that we have made more than two miles an hour: it's
slow work, travelling by compass and marking the trees; but I think the
wood looks lighter before us, now that we are at the top of this hill."

"It does, Ready; I fancy I can see the blue sky again."

"Your eyes are younger than mine, William, and perhaps you may--however,
we shall soon find out."

They now descended into a small hollow, and then went up hill again.  As
soon as they arrived at the top, William cried out, "The sea, Ready!
there's the sea!"

"Very true, William, and I'm not sorry for it."

"I thought we never should get out of that nasty wood again," said
William, as he impatiently pushed on, and at last stood clear of the
cocoa-nut grove.  Ready soon joined him, and they surveyed the scene
before them in silence.



