CHAPTER 45.

But although they resolved as stated in the last chapter, nothing was
done.  Finally, one morning at sunrise, as they were looking round with
the telescope, close to the turtle-pond, Masterman Ready said to Mr
Seagrave, "Indeed, sir, we must no longer remain in this state of
idleness; I have been thinking a great deal of our present position and
prospects; as to the vessel coming back, we must, at present, give up
all hopes of it.  I only wish that we were quite as sure that we shall
not have a visit from the savages: that is my great fear, and it really
haunts me; the idea of our being surprised some night, and Mrs Seagrave
and the dear children, perhaps, murdered in their beds, is awful to
reflect upon."

"God help us!" exclaimed Mr Seagrave, covering up his face.

"God will help us, Mr Seagrave, but at the same time it is necessary
that we should help ourselves; he will give his blessing to our
exertions, but we cannot expect that miracles will be performed for us;
and if we remain as we now are, inactive, and taking no steps to meet
the danger which threatens us, we cannot expect the divine assistance.
We have had a heavy shock, but it is now time that we recover from it,
and put our own shoulders to the wheel."

"I agree with you, Ready," replied William; "indeed I have been thinking
the same thing for many days past."

"We have all been thinking of it, I believe," said Mr Seagrave; "I'm
sure I have lain awake night after night, considering our position and
what we ought to do, but I have never been able to come to any
satisfactory resolution."

"No more have I till last night, Mr Seagrave, but I think that I have
now something to propose which, perhaps, will meet with your approval,"
replied Ready; "so now, sir, suppose we hold another council, and come
to a decision."

"I am most willing, Ready," said Mr Seagrave, sitting down upon a rock;
"and as you are the oldest, and moreover the best adviser of the three,
we will first hear what you have to propose."

"Well then, Mr Seagrave, it appears to me that it will not do to remain
in the house, for we may, as I have said, be surprised by the savages at
any hour in the night, and we have no means of defence against numbers."

"I feel that, and have felt it for some time," replied Mr Seagrave.
"What shall we do, then; shall we return to the cove?"

"I should think not, sir," said Ready; "what I propose is this: we have
made a discovery on the south of the island, which is of great
importance to us; not that I consider the fruit and other plants of any
great value, as they will only serve to increase our luxuries, if I may
so call them, during the summer season.  One great advantage to us, is
the feed which we have found for our live stock, and the fodder for them
during the rainy season; but principally, the patch of yams, which will
afford us food during the winter.  They are of great importance to us,
and we cannot too soon protect them from the pigs, which will certainly
root them all up, if we do not prevent them.  Now, sir, you know what we
had arranged to do, but which we have not done; I think the cocoa-nut
rails will take too much time, and it will be sufficient to make a ditch
and hedge round the yams; but it will be very tedious if we are to go
backwards and forwards to do the work, and Mrs Seagrave and the
children will be left alone.  I therefore propose, as the weather is now
set in fair, and will remain so for months, that we pitch our tents on
that part of the island, and remove the whole family there; we shall
soon be very comfortable, and at all events much safer there than if we
remain here, without any defence."

"It is an excellent plan, Ready; we shall, as you say, be removed from
danger for the time, and when there, we may consider what we had best do
by and by."

"Yes, sir.  Those women may not have gained the other island, it is
true, for they had the wind right against them for several days after
they went away in the canoe, and, moreover, the current sets strong this
way; but if they have, we must expect that the savages will pay us a
visit; they will, of course, come direct to the house, if they do come."

"But, Ready, you don't mean to say that we are to leave this side of the
island altogether, and all our comfortable arrangements?" said William.

"No, William, not altogether; for now I come to the second part of my
proposition.  As soon as we have done our work at the yam plantation,
and made everything as comfortable there as we can, I think we may then
leave Mrs Seagrave and the children in the tents, and work here.  As we
before agreed, let us abandon the house in which we live at present, and
fit out the outhouse which is concealed in the cocoa-nut grove, as a
dwelling-house, and fortify it so as to be secure against any sudden
attack of the savages: for, return here we must, to live, as we cannot
remain in the tents after the rainy season sets in."

"How do you propose to fortify it, Ready?" said Mr Seagrave; "I hardly
know."

"That I will explain to you by and by, sir.  Then, if the savages come
here, at all events we should be able to defend ourselves with
fire-arms; one man behind a stockade is better than twenty who have no
other arms but spears and clubs; and we may, with the help of God, beat
them off."

"I think your plan is excellent, Ready," said Mr Seagrave, "and that
the sooner we begin, the better."

"That there is no doubt of, sir.  Now, the first job is for William and
me to try for the passage through this side of the reef with the boat,
and then we will look for the little harbour which we discovered; as
soon as that is done, we will return and take the tents and all we
require round in the boat, and when we have pitched the tents and all is
arranged, Mrs Seagrave and the children can walk through the wood with
us, and take possession."

"Let us not lose an hour, Ready; we have lost too much time already,"
replied Mr Seagrave.  "What shall we do to-day?"

"After breakfast, William and I will take the boat, and try for the
passage.  You can remain here, packing up the tents and such articles as
must first be carried round.  We shall be back, I hope, by dinner-time."

They then rose, and walked towards the house; all felt relieved in their
minds, after they had made this arrangement, satisfied that they would
be using all human endeavours to ward off the danger which threatened
them, and might then put their confidence in that Providence who would,
if he thought fit, protect them in their need.



