CHAPTER XII. The End of Little Meg's Trouble

It was early in the evening after Meg had gone in search of a doctor,
that Kitty came home, more sober than she had been for several nights,
and very much ashamed of her last outbreak.  She sat down on the top of
the stairs, listening for little Meg to read aloud, but she heard only
the sobs and moanings of Robin, who called incessantly for Meg, without
getting any answer.  Kitty waited for some time, hearkening for her
voice, but after a while she knocked gently at the door.  There was no
reply, but after knocking again and again she heard Robin call out in a
frightened tone.

'What's that?' he cried.

'It's me, your own Kitty,' she said; 'where's little Meg?'

'I don't know,' said Robin, 'she's gone away, and there's nobody but me
and baby; and baby's asleep, and so cold.'

'What are you crying for, Robbie?' asked Kitty.

'I'm crying for everything,' said Robin.

'Don't you be frightened, Robbie,' she said soothingly; 'Kitty'll stay
outside the door, and sing pretty songs to you, till Meg comes home.'

She waited a long time, till the clocks struck twelve, and still Meg
did not come.  From time to time Kitty spoke some reassuring words to
Robin, or sang him some little songs she remembered from her own
childhood; but his cries grew more and more distressing, and at length
Kitty resolved to break her promise, and unlock Meg's door once again
to move the children into her own attic.

She lit a candle, and entered the dark room.  The fire was gone out,
and Robin sat up on the pillow, his face wet with tears and his black
eyes large with terror.  The baby, which lay beside him, seemed very
still, with its wasted puny hands crossed upon its breast; so quiet and
still that Kitty looked more closely, and held the light nearer to its
slumbering face.  What could ail it?  What had brought that awful smile
upon its tiny face?  Kitty touched it fearfully with the tip of her
finger; and then she stood dumb and motionless before the terrible
little corpse.

She partly knew, and partly guessed, what had done this thing.  She
recollected, but vaguely enough, that one of her companions, who had
grown weary of the little creature's pitiful cry, had promised to quiet
it for her, and how speedily it had fallen off into a profound,
unbroken slumber.  And there it lay, in the same slumber perhaps.  She
touched it again; but no, the sleep it slept now was even deeper than
that--a sleep so sound that its eyelids would never open again to this
world's light, nor its sealed lips ever utter a word of this world's
speech.  Kitty could scarcely believe it; but she could not bear to
stay in that mute, gentle, uncomplaining presence; and she lifted up
Robin to carry him into her own room.  Oh that God had but called her
away when she was an innocent baby like that!

Robin's feverishness was almost gone; and now, wrapped in Kitty's gown
and rocked to sleep on her lap, he lay contented and restful, while she
sat thinking in the dark, for the candle soon burned itself out, until
the solemn grey light of the morning dawned slowly in the east.  She
had made up her mind now what she would do.  There was only one more
sin lying before her.  She had grown up bad, and broken her mother's
heart, and now she had brought this great overwhelming sorrow upon poor
little Meg.  There was but one end to a sinful life like hers, and the
sooner it came the better.  She would wait till Meg came home and give
up Robin to her, for she would not hurry on to that last crime before
Meg was there to take care of him.  Then she saw herself stealing along
the streets, down to an old pier she knew of, where boats had ceased to
ply, and where no policeman would be near to hinder her, or any one
about to rescue her; and then she would fling herself, worthless and
wretched as she was, into the rapid river, which had borne so many
worthless wretches like her upon its strong current into the land of
darkness and death, of which she did not dare to think.  That was what
she would do, saying nothing to any one; and if she could ask anything
of God, it would be that her mother might never find out what had
become of her.

So Kitty sat with her dark thoughts long after Angel Court had awakened
to its ordinary life, its groans, and curses, and sobs; until the sun
looked in cheerily upon her and Robin, as it did upon Meg in Mrs
Christie's nursery.  She did not care to put him down, for he looked
very pretty, and happy, and peaceful in his soft sleep, and whenever
she moved he stirred a little, and pouted his lips as if to reproach
her.  Besides, it was the last time she would hold a child in her arms;
and though they ached somewhat, they folded round him fondly.  At last
she heard a man's step upon the ladder mounting to the attics, and
Meg's voice speaking faintly.  Could it be that her father was come
home at last?  Oh! what would their eyes see when they opened that
door?  Kitty held her breath to listen for the first sound of anguish
and amazement; but it was poor little Meg's voice which reached her
before any other.

'Robbie! oh, Robbie!' she cried, in a tone of piercing terror, 'what
has become of my little Robbie?'

'He's safe, he's here, Meg,' answered Kitty, starting to her feet, and
rushing with him to Meg's attic.

It was no rough, weather-beaten seaman, who was just placing Meg on a
chair, as if he had carried her upstairs; but some strange, well-clad
gentleman, and behind him stood an elderly woman, who turned sharply
round as she heard Kitty's voice.

'Posy!' cried Mrs Blossom.

No one but her own mother could have known again the bright, merry,
rosy girl, whom the neighbours called Posy, in the thin, withered,
pallid woman who stood motionless in the middle of the room.  Even Meg
forgot for a moment her fears for Robin.  Dr Christie had only time to
catch him from her failing arms, before she fell down senseless upon
the floor at her mother's feet.

'Let me do everything for her,' exclaimed Mrs Blossom, pushing away Dr
Christie; 'she's my Posy, I tell you.  You wouldn't know her again, but
I know her.  I'll do everything for her; she's my girl, my little one;
she's the apple of my eye.'

But it was a very long time before Mrs Blossom, with Dr Christie's
help, could bring Posy to life again; and then they lifted her into her
poor bed, and Dr Christie left her mother alone with her, and went back
to Meg.  Robin was ailing very little, he said: but the baby?  Yes, the
baby must have died even if little Meg had fetched him at once.
Nothing could have saved it, and it had suffered no pain, he added
tenderly.

'I think I must take you two away from this place,' said Dr Christie.

'Oh, no, no,' answered Meg earnestly; 'I must stay till father comes,
and I expect him to-day or to-morrow.  Please, sir, leave me and Robbie
here till he comes.'

'Then you must have somebody to take care of you,' said Dr Christie.

'No, please, sir,' answered Meg, in a low and cautious voice, 'mother
gave me a secret to keep that I can't tell to nobody, and I promised
her I'd never let nobody come into my room till father comes home.  I
couldn't help you, and Mrs Blossom, and Kitty coming in this time; but
nobody mustn't come in again.'

'My little girl,' said Dr Christie kindly, 'I dare say your mother
never thought of her secret becoming a great trouble to you.  Could you
not tell it to me?'

'No,' replied Meg, 'it's a very great secret; and please, when baby's
buried like mother, me and Robbie must go on living here alone till
father comes.'

'Poor child!' said Dr Christie, rubbing his eyes, 'did you know baby
was quite dead?'

'Yes,' she answered, 'but I didn't ask God to let baby live, because
mother said she'd like to take her with her.  But I did ask Him to make
Robin well, and bring back Posy; and now there's nothing for Him to do
but let father come home.  I knew it was all true; it's in the Bible,
and if I'm not one of God's own children, it says, "Them that ask Him."
So I asked Him.'

Meg's voice sank, and her head dropped; for now that she was at home
again, and Robin was found to be all right, her spirit failed her.  Dr
Christie went out upon the landing, and held a consultation with Mrs
Blossom, in which they agreed that for the present, until Meg was well
enough to take care of herself, she should be nursed in Kitty's attic,
with her own door kept locked, and the key left in her possession.  So
Dr Christie carried Meg into the back attic, and laid her upon Kitty's
mattress.  Kitty was cowering down on the hearth, with her face buried
on her knees, and did not look up once through all the noise of Meg's
removal; though when her mother told her what they were doing she made
a gesture of assent to it.  Dr Christie went away; and Mrs Blossom, who
wanted to buy many things which were sorely needed in the poor attic,
put her arm fondly round Kitty's neck.

'Posy,' she said, 'you wouldn't think to go and leave little Meg alone
if I went out to buy some things, and took Robin with me?'

'No, I'll stop,' said Kitty, but without lifting her head.  When they
were alone together, Meg raised herself as well as she could on the arm
that was not hurt, and looked wistfully at Kitty's bowed-down head and
crouching form.

'Are you really Posy?' she asked.

'I used to be Posy,' answered Kitty, in a mournful voice.

'Didn't I tell you God would let your mother find you?' said Meg; 'it's
all come true, every bit of it.'

'But God hasn't let baby live,' muttered Kitty.

'I never asked Him for that,' she said falteringly; 'I didn't know as
baby was near going to die, and maybe it's a better thing for her to go
to mother and God.  Angel Court ain't a nice place to live in, and she
might have growed up bad.  But if people do grow up bad,' added Meg, in
a very tender tone, 'God can make 'em good again if they'd only ask
Him.'

As little Meg spoke, and during the silence which followed, strange
memories began to stir in the poor girl's heart, recalled there by some
mysterious and Divine power.  Words and scenes, forgotten since
childhood, came back with wonderful freshness and force.  She thought
of a poor, guilty, outcast woman, reviled and despised by all save One,
who had compassion even for her, forgave all her sins, stilled the
clamour of her accusers, and said, 'Thy faith hath saved thee; go in
peace.'  She remembered the time when the records of His infinite love
had been repeated by her innocent young lips and pondered in her maiden
heart.  Like some echo from the distant past she seemed to hear the
words, 'By Thine agony and bloody sweat; by Thy cross and passion; by
Thy precious death and burial, good Lord deliver us.  O Lamb of God,
that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.'

'Oh!  Meg!  Meg!' cried Kitty, almost crawling to the corner where she
lay, and falling down beside her on the floor, with her poor pale face
still hidden from sight, 'ask God for me to be made good again.'

Little Meg stretched out her unbruised arm, and laid her hand upon
Kitty's bended head.

'You must ask Him for yourself,' she said, after thinking for a minute
or two: 'I don't know as it 'ud do for me to ask God, if you didn't as
well.'

'What shall I say, Meg?' asked Kitty.

'If I was you,' said Meg, 'and had grow'd up wicked, and run away from
mother, I'd say, "Pray God, make me a good girl again, and let me be a
comfort to mother till she dies; for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen."'

There was a dead silence in the back attic, except for the near noise
and distant din which came from the court below, and the great
labyrinth of streets around.  Little Meg's eyes shone lovingly and
pityingly upon Kitty, who looked up for an instant, and caught their
light.  Then she dropped her head down upon the mattress, and gave way
to a storm of tears and sobs.

'O God,' she cried, 'do have mercy upon me, and make me good again, if
it's possible.  Help me to be a good girl to mother.  God forgive me
for Jesus Christ's sake!'

She sobbed out this prayer over and over again, until her voice fell
into a low whisper which even Meg could not hear; and so she lay upon
the floor beside the mattress until her mother came back.  Mrs
Blossom's face was pale, but radiant with gladness, and Posy looked at
it for the first time fully.  Then she gave a great cry of mingled joy
and sorrow, and running to her threw her arms round her neck, and laid
her face upon her shoulder.

'God'll hear me and have mercy upon me,' she cried.  'I'm going to be
your Posy again, mother!'




