CHAPTER XIII. _Surprises_

THE prince said nothing, the ambassador said nothing, Lady Rosalind said
never a word till they were in the drawing-room. It was a lovely warm
evening, and the French windows were wide open on the balcony, which
looked over the town and away north to the hills. Below them flowed the
clear, green water of the Gluckthal And still nobody said a word. At
last the prince spoke: “This is a very strange story, Lord Kelso!”

“Very, sir!” said the ambassador. “But true,” added the prince; “at
least, there is no reason in the nature of things why it shouldn’t be
true.”

“I can hardly believe, sir, that the conduct of Benson, whom I always
found a most respectable man, deserved--”

“That he should be ‘come for,’” said the prince. “Oh, no; it was a mere
accident, and might have happened to any of us who chanced to sit down
on my carpet.”

And then the prince told them, shortly, all about it: how the carpet
was one of a number of fairy properties, which had been given him at
his christening; and how so long a time had gone by before he discovered
them; and how, probably, the carpet had carried the butler where he had
said he wanted to go--namely, to the king’s Court at Falkenstein.

“It would not matter so much,” added the prince, “only I had relied on
making my peace with his majesty, my father, by aid of those horns and
that tail. He was set on getting them; and if the Lady Rosalind had
not expressed a wish for them, they would to-day have been in his
possession.”

“Oh, sir, you honour us too highly,” murmured Lady Rosalind; and the
prince blushed and said:

“Not at all! Impossible!”

Then, of course, the ambassador became quite certain that his daughter
was admired by the crown prince, who was on bad terms with the king
of the country; and a more uncomfortable position for an
ambassador--however, they are used to them.

“What on earth am I to do with the young man?” he thought. “He can’t
stay here for ever; and without his carpet he can’t get away, for the
soldiers have orders to seize him as soon as he appears in the street.
And in the meantime Benson will be pretending that _he_ killed the
Firedrake--for he must have got to Falkenstein by now,--and they will be
for marrying him to the king’s niece, and making my butler crown prince
to the kingdom of Pantouflia! It is dreadful!”

Now all this time the prince was on the balcony, telling Lady Rosalind
all about how he got the Firedrake done for, in the most modest way;
for, as he said: “I didn’t kill him: and it is really the Remora, poor
fellow, who should marry Molly; but he ‘s dead.”

At this very moment there was a _whizz_ in the air; something shot past
them, and, through the open window, the king, the queen, Benson, and the
mortal remains of the Firedrake were shot into the ambassador’s drawing
room!






