CHAPTER III. THE PRINCESS AND--WE SHALL SEE WHO


WHEN she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair. She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next. But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound. Could it be the rain? No. It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard. The
low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little while
and then beginning again. It was more like the hum of a very happy bee
that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower, than
anything else I can think of at this moment. Where could it come from?
She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another. When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something in
that room. What could it be? She was rather afraid, but her curiosity
was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very gently and
peeped in. What do you think she saw? A very old lady who sat spinning.

"_Oh, Mr. Editor! I know the story you are going to tell: it's The
Sleeping Beauty; only you're spinning too, and making it longer._"

"_No, indeed, it is not that story. Why should I tell one that every
properly educated child knows already? More old ladies than one have sat
spinning in a garret. Besides, the old lady in that story was only
spinning with a spindle, and this one was spinning with a spinning
wheel, else how could the princess have heard the sweet noise through
the door? Do you know the difference? Did you ever see a spindle or a
spinning wheel? I daresay you never did. Well, ask your mamma to explain
to you the difference. Between ourselves, however, I shouldn't wonder if
she didn't know much better than you. Another thing is, that this is not
a fairy story; but a goblin story. And one thing more, this old lady
spinning was not an old nurse--but--you shall see who. I think I have
now made it quite plain that this is not that lovely story of The
Sleeping Beauty. It is quite a new one, I assure you, and I will try to
tell it as prettily as I can._"

Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white. I will tell you more. Her hair was combed
back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all over
her back. That is not much like an old lady--is it? Ah! but it was white
almost as snow. And although her face was so smooth, her eyes looked so
wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be old. The
princess, though she could not have told you why, did think her very old
indeed--quite fifty--she said to herself. But she was rather older than
that, as you shall hear.

While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said in a sweet, but old and rather
shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued hum of her
wheel:

"Come in, my dear; come in. I am glad to see you."

That the princess was a real princess, you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses, but
were only rather vulgar little girls. She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.

"Come to me, my dear," said the old lady.

And again the princess did as she was told. She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess, but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.

"Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?" asked the old
lady.

"Crying," answered the princess.

"Why, child?"

"Because I couldn't find my way down again."

"But you could find your way up."

"Not at first--not for a long time."

"But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra. Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?"

"No."

"Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?"

"Please I didn't know you were here. I will next time."

"There's a good child!" said the old lady.

Then she stopped her wheel, and rose, and, going out of the room,
returned with a little silver basin and a soft white towel, with which
she washed and wiped the bright little face. And the princess thought
her hands were so smooth and nice!

When she carried away the basin and towel, the little princess wondered
to see how straight and tall she was, for, although she was so old, she
didn't stoop a bit. She was dressed in black velvet with thick white
heavy-looking lace about it; and on the black dress her hair shone like
silver. There was hardly any more furniture in the room than there might
have been in that of the poorest old woman who made her bread by her
spinning. There was no carpet on the floor--no table anywhere--nothing
but the spinning-wheel and the chair beside it. When she came back, she
sat down again, and without a word began her spinning once more, while
Irene, who had never seen a spinning-wheel, stood by her side and looked
on. When the old lady had succeeded in getting her thread fairly in
operation again, she said to the princess, but without looking at her:

"Do you know my name, child?"

"No, I don't know it," answered the princess.

"My name is Irene."

"That's _my_ name!" cried the princess.

"I know that. I let you have mine. I haven't got your name. You've got
mine."

"How can that be?" asked the princess, bewildered. "I've always had my
name."

"Your papa, the king, asked me if I had any objection to your having it;
and of course I hadn't. I let you have it with pleasure."

"It was very kind of you to give me your name--and such a pretty one,"
said the princess.

"Oh, not so _very_ kind!" said the old lady. "A name is one of those
things one can give away and keep all the same. I have a good many such
things. Wouldn't you like to know who I am, child?"

"Yes, that I should--very much."

"I'm your great-great-grandmother," said the lady.

"What's that?" asked the princess.

"I'm your father's mother's father's mother."

"Oh, dear! I can't understand that," said the princess.

"I daresay not. I didn't expect you would. But that's no reason why I
shouldn't say it."

"Oh no!" answered the princess.

"I will explain it all to you when you are older," the lady went on.
"But you will be able to understand this much now: I came here to take
care of you."

"Is it long since you came? Was it yesterday? Or was it to-day, because
it was so wet that I couldn't get out?"

"I've been here ever since you came yourself."

"What a long time!" said the princess. "I don't remember it at all."

"No. I suppose not."

"But I never saw you before."

"No. But you shall see me again."

"Do you live in this room always?"

"I don't sleep in it. I sleep on the opposite side of the landing. I sit
here most of the day."

"I shouldn't like it. My nursery is much prettier. You must be a queen
too, if you are my great big grandmother."

"Yes, I am a queen."

"Where is your crown then?"

"In my bedroom."

"I _should_ like to see it."

"You shall some day--not to-day."

"I wonder why nursie never told me."

"Nursie doesn't know. She never saw me."

"But somebody knows that you are in the house?"

"No; nobody."

"How do you get your dinner then?"

"I keep poultry--of a sort."

"Where do you keep them?"

"I will show you."

"And who makes the chicken broth for you?"

"I never kill any of my chickens."

"Then I can't understand."

"What did you have for breakfast this morning?"

"Oh! I had bread and milk, and an egg.--I daresay you eat their eggs."

"Yes, that's it. I eat their eggs."

"Is that what makes your hair so white?"

"No, my dear. It's old age. I am very old."

"I thought so. Are you fifty?"

"Yes--more than that."

"Are you a hundred?"

"Yes--more than that. I am too old for you to guess. Come and see my
chickens."

[She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose such a
flapping of wings.]

Again she stopped her spinning. She rose, took the princess by the hand,
led her out of the room, and opened the door opposite the stair. The
princess expected to see a lot of hens and chickens, but instead of
that, she saw the blue sky first, and then the roofs of the house, with
a multitude of the loveliest pigeons, mostly white, but of all colors,
walking about, making bows to each other, and talking a language she
could not understand. She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose
such a flapping of wings, that she in her turn was startled.

"You've frightened my poultry," said the old lady, smiling.

"And they've frightened me," said the princess, smiling too. "But what
very nice poultry! Are the eggs nice?"

"Yes, very nice."

"What a small egg-spoon you must have! Wouldn't it be better to keep
hens, and get bigger eggs?"

"How should I feed them, though?"

"I see," said the princess. "The pigeons feed themselves. They've got
wings."

"Just so. If they couldn't fly, I couldn't eat their eggs."

"But how do you get at the eggs? Where are their nests?"

The lady took hold of a little loop of string in the wall at the side of
the door, and lifting a shutter showed a great many pigeon-holes with
nests, some with young ones and some with eggs in them. The birds came
in at the other side, and she took out the eggs on this side. She closed
it again quickly, lest the young ones should be frightened.

"Oh what a nice way!" cried the princess. "Will you give me an egg to
eat? I'm rather hungry."

"I will some day, but now you must go back, or nursie will be miserable
about you. I daresay she's looking for you everywhere."

"Except here," answered the princess. "Oh how surprised she _will_ be
when I tell her about my great big grand-grandmother!"

"Yes, that she will!" said the old lady with a curious smile. "Mind you
tell her all about it exactly."

"That I will. Please will you take me back to her?"

"I can't go all the way, but I will take you to the top of the stair,
and then you must run down quite fast into your own room."

The little princess put her hand in the old lady's, who, looking this
way and that, brought her to the top of the first stair, and thence to
the bottom of the second, and did not leave her till she saw her half
way down the third. When she heard the cry of her nurse's pleasure at
finding her, she turned and walked up the stairs again, very fast indeed
for such a very great grandmother, and sat down to her spinning with
another strange smile on her sweet old face.

About this spinning of hers I will tell you more next time.

Guess what she was spinning.




