CHAPTER II. Peter’s coal-mine.


“What fun!” said Mother, in the dark, feeling for the matches on the
table. “How frightened the poor mice were--I don’t believe they were
rats at all.”

She struck a match and relighted the candle and everyone looked at each
other by its winky, blinky light.

“Well,” she said, “you’ve often wanted something to happen and now it
has. This is quite an adventure, isn’t it? I told Mrs. Viney to get us
some bread and butter, and meat and things, and to have supper ready. I
suppose she’s laid it in the dining-room. So let’s go and see.”

The dining-room opened out of the kitchen. It looked much darker than
the kitchen when they went in with the one candle. Because the kitchen
was whitewashed, but the dining-room was dark wood from floor to
ceiling, and across the ceiling there were heavy black beams. There was
a muddled maze of dusty furniture--the breakfast-room furniture from
the old home where they had lived all their lives. It seemed a very long
time ago, and a very long way off.

There was the table certainly, and there were chairs, but there was no
supper.

“Let’s look in the other rooms,” said Mother; and they looked. And in
each room was the same kind of blundering half-arrangement of furniture,
and fire-irons and crockery, and all sorts of odd things on the floor,
but there was nothing to eat; even in the pantry there were only a rusty
cake-tin and a broken plate with whitening mixed in it.

“What a horrid old woman!” said Mother; “she’s just walked off with the
money and not got us anything to eat at all.”

“Then shan’t we have any supper at all?” asked Phyllis, dismayed,
stepping back on to a soap-dish that cracked responsively.

“Oh, yes,” said Mother, “only it’ll mean unpacking one of those big
cases that we put in the cellar. Phil, do mind where you’re walking to,
there’s a dear. Peter, hold the light.”

The cellar door opened out of the kitchen. There were five wooden steps
leading down. It wasn’t a proper cellar at all, the children thought,
because its ceiling went up as high as the kitchen’s. A bacon-rack hung
under its ceiling. There was wood in it, and coal. Also the big cases.

Peter held the candle, all on one side, while Mother tried to open the
great packing-case. It was very securely nailed down.

“Where’s the hammer?” asked Peter.

“That’s just it,” said Mother. “I’m afraid it’s inside the box. But
there’s a coal-shovel--and there’s the kitchen poker.”

And with these she tried to get the case open.

“Let me do it,” said Peter, thinking he could do it better himself.
Everyone thinks this when he sees another person stirring a fire, or
opening a box, or untying a knot in a bit of string.

“You’ll hurt your hands, Mammy,” said Roberta; “let me.”

“I wish Father was here,” said Phyllis; “he’d get it open in two shakes.
What are you kicking me for, Bobbie?”

“I wasn’t,” said Roberta.

Just then the first of the long nails in the packing-case began to come
out with a scrunch. Then a lath was raised and then another, till all
four stood up with the long nails in them shining fiercely like iron
teeth in the candle-light.

“Hooray!” said Mother; “here are some candles--the very first thing! You
girls go and light them. You’ll find some saucers and things. Just drop
a little candle-grease in the saucer and stick the candle upright in
it.”

“How many shall we light?”

“As many as ever you like,” said Mother, gaily. “The great thing is
to be cheerful. Nobody can be cheerful in the dark except owls and
dormice.”

So the girls lighted candles. The head of the first match flew off and
stuck to Phyllis’s finger; but, as Roberta said, it was only a little
burn, and she might have had to be a Roman martyr and be burned whole if
she had happened to live in the days when those things were fashionable.

Then, when the dining-room was lighted by fourteen candles, Roberta
fetched coal and wood and lighted a fire.

“It’s very cold for May,” she said, feeling what a grown-up thing it was
to say.

The fire-light and the candle-light made the dining-room look very
different, for now you could see that the dark walls were of wood,
carved here and there into little wreaths and loops.

The girls hastily ‘tidied’ the room, which meant putting the chairs
against the wall, and piling all the odds and ends into a corner and
partly hiding them with the big leather arm-chair that Father used to
sit in after dinner.

“Bravo!” cried Mother, coming in with a tray full of things. “This is
something like! I’ll just get a tablecloth and then--”

The tablecloth was in a box with a proper lock that was opened with a
key and not with a shovel, and when the cloth was spread on the table, a
real feast was laid out on it.

Everyone was very, very tired, but everyone cheered up at the sight of
the funny and delightful supper. There were biscuits, the Marie and the
plain kind, sardines, preserved ginger, cooking raisins, and candied
peel and marmalade.

“What a good thing Aunt Emma packed up all the odds and ends out of the
Store cupboard,” said Mother. “Now, Phil, DON’T put the marmalade spoon
in among the sardines.”

“No, I won’t, Mother,” said Phyllis, and put it down among the Marie
biscuits.

“Let’s drink Aunt Emma’s health,” said Roberta, suddenly; “what should
we have done if she hadn’t packed up these things? Here’s to Aunt Emma!”

And the toast was drunk in ginger wine and water, out of
willow-patterned tea-cups, because the glasses couldn’t be found.

They all felt that they had been a little hard on Aunt Emma. She wasn’t
a nice cuddly person like Mother, but after all it was she who had
thought of packing up the odds and ends of things to eat.

It was Aunt Emma, too, who had aired all the sheets ready; and the men
who had moved the furniture had put the bedsteads together, so the beds
were soon made.

“Good night, chickies,” said Mother. “I’m sure there aren’t any rats.
But I’ll leave my door open, and then if a mouse comes, you need only
scream, and I’ll come and tell it exactly what I think of it.”

Then she went to her own room. Roberta woke to hear the little
travelling clock chime two. It sounded like a church clock ever so far
away, she always thought. And she heard, too, Mother still moving about
in her room.

Next morning Roberta woke Phyllis by pulling her hair gently, but quite
enough for her purpose.

“Wassermarrer?” asked Phyllis, still almost wholly asleep.

“Wake up! wake up!” said Roberta. “We’re in the new house--don’t you
remember? No servants or anything. Let’s get up and begin to be useful.
We’ll just creep down mouse-quietly, and have everything beautiful
before Mother gets up. I’ve woke Peter. He’ll be dressed as soon as we
are.”

So they dressed quietly and quickly. Of course, there was no water in
their room, so when they got down they washed as much as they thought
was necessary under the spout of the pump in the yard. One pumped and
the other washed. It was splashy but interesting.

“It’s much more fun than basin washing,” said Roberta. “How sparkly
the weeds are between the stones, and the moss on the roof--oh, and the
flowers!”

The roof of the back kitchen sloped down quite low. It was made
of thatch and it had moss on it, and house-leeks and stonecrop and
wallflowers, and even a clump of purple flag-flowers, at the far corner.

“This is far, far, far and away prettier than Edgecombe Villa,” said
Phyllis. “I wonder what the garden’s like.”

“We mustn’t think of the garden yet,” said Roberta, with earnest energy.
“Let’s go in and begin to work.”

They lighted the fire and put the kettle on, and they arranged the
crockery for breakfast; they could not find all the right things, but
a glass ash-tray made an excellent salt-cellar, and a newish baking-tin
seemed as if it would do to put bread on, if they had any.

When there seemed to be nothing more that they could do, they went out
again into the fresh bright morning.

“We’ll go into the garden now,” said Peter. But somehow they couldn’t
find the garden. They went round the house and round the house. The yard
occupied the back, and across it were stables and outbuildings. On the
other three sides the house stood simply in a field, without a yard
of garden to divide it from the short smooth turf. And yet they had
certainly seen the garden wall the night before.

It was a hilly country. Down below they could see the line of the
railway, and the black yawning mouth of a tunnel. The station was out of
sight. There was a great bridge with tall arches running across one end
of the valley.

“Never mind the garden,” said Peter; “let’s go down and look at the
railway. There might be trains passing.”

“We can see them from here,” said Roberta, slowly; “let’s sit down a
bit.”

So they all sat down on a great flat grey stone that had pushed itself
up out of the grass; it was one of many that lay about on the hillside,
and when Mother came out to look for them at eight o’clock, she found
them deeply asleep in a contented, sun-warmed bunch.

They had made an excellent fire, and had set the kettle on it at about
half-past five. So that by eight the fire had been out for some time,
the water had all boiled away, and the bottom was burned out of the
kettle. Also they had not thought of washing the crockery before they
set the table.

“But it doesn’t matter--the cups and saucers, I mean,” said Mother.
“Because I’ve found another room--I’d quite forgotten there was one. And
it’s magic! And I’ve boiled the water for tea in a saucepan.”

The forgotten room opened out of the kitchen. In the agitation and half
darkness the night before its door had been mistaken for a cupboard’s.
It was a little square room, and on its table, all nicely set out, was a
joint of cold roast beef, with bread, butter, cheese, and a pie.

“Pie for breakfast!” cried Peter; “how perfectly ripping!”

“It isn’t pigeon-pie,” said Mother; “it’s only apple. Well, this is the
supper we ought to have had last night. And there was a note from Mrs.
Viney. Her son-in-law has broken his arm, and she had to get home early.
She’s coming this morning at ten.”

That was a wonderful breakfast. It is unusual to begin the day with
cold apple pie, but the children all said they would rather have it than
meat.

“You see it’s more like dinner than breakfast to us,” said Peter,
passing his plate for more, “because we were up so early.”

The day passed in helping Mother to unpack and arrange things. Six small
legs quite ached with running about while their owners carried clothes
and crockery and all sorts of things to their proper places. It was not
till quite late in the afternoon that Mother said:--

“There! That’ll do for to-day. I’ll lie down for an hour, so as to be as
fresh as a lark by supper-time.”

Then they all looked at each other. Each of the three expressive
countenances expressed the same thought. That thought was double,
and consisted, like the bits of information in the Child’s Guide to
Knowledge, of a question and an answer.

Q. Where shall we go?

A. To the railway.

So to the railway they went, and as soon as they started for the railway
they saw where the garden had hidden itself. It was right behind the
stables, and it had a high wall all round.

“Oh, never mind about the garden now!” cried Peter. “Mother told me
this morning where it was. It’ll keep till to-morrow. Let’s get to the
railway.”

The way to the railway was all down hill over smooth, short turf with
here and there furze bushes and grey and yellow rocks sticking out like
candied peel from the top of a cake.

The way ended in a steep run and a wooden fence--and there was the
railway with the shining metals and the telegraph wires and posts and
signals.

They all climbed on to the top of the fence, and then suddenly there was
a rumbling sound that made them look along the line to the right, where
the dark mouth of a tunnel opened itself in the face of a rocky cliff;
next moment a train had rushed out of the tunnel with a shriek and
a snort, and had slid noisily past them. They felt the rush of its
passing, and the pebbles on the line jumped and rattled under it as it
went by.

“Oh!” said Roberta, drawing a long breath; “it was like a great dragon
tearing by. Did you feel it fan us with its hot wings?”

“I suppose a dragon’s lair might look very like that tunnel from the
outside,” said Phyllis.

But Peter said:--

“I never thought we should ever get as near to a train as this. It’s the
most ripping sport!”

“Better than toy-engines, isn’t it?” said Roberta.

(I am tired of calling Roberta by her name. I don’t see why I should.
No one else did. Everyone else called her Bobbie, and I don’t see why I
shouldn’t.)

“I don’t know; it’s different,” said Peter. “It seems so odd to see ALL
of a train. It’s awfully tall, isn’t it?”

“We’ve always seen them cut in half by platforms,” said Phyllis.

“I wonder if that train was going to London,” Bobbie said. “London’s
where Father is.”

“Let’s go down to the station and find out,” said Peter.

So they went.

They walked along the edge of the line, and heard the telegraph wires
humming over their heads. When you are in the train, it seems such a
little way between post and post, and one after another the posts seem
to catch up the wires almost more quickly than you can count them. But
when you have to walk, the posts seem few and far between.

But the children got to the station at last.

Never before had any of them been at a station, except for the purpose
of catching trains--or perhaps waiting for them--and always with
grown-ups in attendance, grown-ups who were not themselves interested in
stations, except as places from which they wished to get away.

Never before had they passed close enough to a signal-box to be able to
notice the wires, and to hear the mysterious ‘ping, ping,’ followed by
the strong, firm clicking of machinery.

The very sleepers on which the rails lay were a delightful path to
travel by--just far enough apart to serve as the stepping-stones in a
game of foaming torrents hastily organised by Bobbie.

Then to arrive at the station, not through the booking office, but in
a freebooting sort of way by the sloping end of the platform. This in
itself was joy.

Joy, too, it was to peep into the porters’ room, where the lamps are,
and the Railway almanac on the wall, and one porter half asleep behind a
paper.

There were a great many crossing lines at the station; some of them just
ran into a yard and stopped short, as though they were tired of business
and meant to retire for good. Trucks stood on the rails here, and on one
side was a great heap of coal--not a loose heap, such as you see in your
coal cellar, but a sort of solid building of coals with large square
blocks of coal outside used just as though they were bricks, and built
up till the heap looked like the picture of the Cities of the Plain in
‘Bible Stories for Infants.’ There was a line of whitewash near the top
of the coaly wall.

When presently the Porter lounged out of his room at the twice-repeated
tingling thrill of a gong over the station door, Peter said, “How do you
do?” in his best manner, and hastened to ask what the white mark was on
the coal for.

“To mark how much coal there be,” said the Porter, “so as we’ll know if
anyone nicks it. So don’t you go off with none in your pockets, young
gentleman!”

This seemed, at the time but a merry jest, and Peter felt at once that
the Porter was a friendly sort with no nonsense about him. But later the
words came back to Peter with a new meaning.

Have you ever gone into a farmhouse kitchen on a baking day, and seen
the great crock of dough set by the fire to rise? If you have, and if
you were at that time still young enough to be interested in everything
you saw, you will remember that you found yourself quite unable to
resist the temptation to poke your finger into the soft round of dough
that curved inside the pan like a giant mushroom. And you will remember
that your finger made a dent in the dough, and that slowly, but quite
surely, the dent disappeared, and the dough looked quite the same as it
did before you touched it. Unless, of course, your hand was extra dirty,
in which case, naturally, there would be a little black mark.

Well, it was just like that with the sorrow the children had felt at
Father’s going away, and at Mother’s being so unhappy. It made a deep
impression, but the impression did not last long.

They soon got used to being without Father, though they did not forget
him; and they got used to not going to school, and to seeing very little
of Mother, who was now almost all day shut up in her upstairs room
writing, writing, writing. She used to come down at tea-time and read
aloud the stories she had written. They were lovely stories.

The rocks and hills and valleys and trees, the canal, and above all, the
railway, were so new and so perfectly pleasing that the remembrance of
the old life in the villa grew to seem almost like a dream.

Mother had told them more than once that they were ‘quite poor now,’ but
this did not seem to be anything but a way of speaking. Grown-up people,
even Mothers, often make remarks that don’t seem to mean anything in
particular, just for the sake of saying something, seemingly. There was
always enough to eat, and they wore the same kind of nice clothes they
had always worn.

But in June came three wet days; the rain came down, straight as lances,
and it was very, very cold. Nobody could go out, and everybody shivered.
They all went up to the door of Mother’s room and knocked.

“Well, what is it?” asked Mother from inside.

“Mother,” said Bobbie, “mayn’t I light a fire? I do know how.”

And Mother said: “No, my ducky-love. We mustn’t have fires in June--coal
is so dear. If you’re cold, go and have a good romp in the attic.
That’ll warm you.”

“But, Mother, it only takes such a very little coal to make a fire.”

“It’s more than we can afford, chickeny-love,” said Mother, cheerfully.
“Now run away, there’s darlings--I’m madly busy!”

“Mother’s always busy now,” said Phyllis, in a whisper to Peter. Peter
did not answer. He shrugged his shoulders. He was thinking.

Thought, however, could not long keep itself from the suitable
furnishing of a bandit’s lair in the attic. Peter was the bandit, of
course. Bobbie was his lieutenant, his band of trusty robbers, and, in
due course, the parent of Phyllis, who was the captured maiden for whom
a magnificent ransom--in horse-beans--was unhesitatingly paid.

They all went down to tea flushed and joyous as any mountain brigands.

But when Phyllis was going to add jam to her bread and butter, Mother
said:--

“Jam OR butter, dear--not jam AND butter. We can’t afford that sort of
reckless luxury nowadays.”

Phyllis finished the slice of bread and butter in silence, and followed
it up by bread and jam. Peter mingled thought and weak tea.

After tea they went back to the attic and he said to his sisters:--

“I have an idea.”

“What’s that?” they asked politely.

“I shan’t tell you,” was Peter’s unexpected rejoinder.

“Oh, very well,” said Bobbie; and Phil said, “Don’t, then.”

“Girls,” said Peter, “are always so hasty tempered.”

“I should like to know what boys are?” said Bobbie, with fine disdain.
“I don’t want to know about your silly ideas.”

“You’ll know some day,” said Peter, keeping his own temper by what
looked exactly like a miracle; “if you hadn’t been so keen on a row, I
might have told you about it being only noble-heartedness that made me
not tell you my idea. But now I shan’t tell you anything at all about
it--so there!”

And it was, indeed, some time before he could be induced to say
anything, and when he did it wasn’t much. He said:--

“The only reason why I won’t tell you my idea that I’m going to do is
because it MAY be wrong, and I don’t want to drag you into it.”

“Don’t you do it if it’s wrong, Peter,” said Bobbie; “let me do it.” But
Phyllis said:--

“_I_ should like to do wrong if YOU’RE going to!”

“No,” said Peter, rather touched by this devotion; “it’s a forlorn hope,
and I’m going to lead it. All I ask is that if Mother asks where I am,
you won’t blab.”

“We haven’t got anything TO blab,” said Bobbie, indignantly.

“Oh, yes, you have!” said Peter, dropping horse-beans through his
fingers. “I’ve trusted you to the death. You know I’m going to do a lone
adventure--and some people might think it wrong--I don’t. And if Mother
asks where I am, say I’m playing at mines.”

“What sort of mines?”

“You just say mines.”

“You might tell US, Pete.”

“Well, then, COAL-mines. But don’t you let the word pass your lips on
pain of torture.”

“You needn’t threaten,” said Bobbie, “and I do think you might let us
help.”

“If I find a coal-mine, you shall help cart the coal,” Peter
condescended to promise.

“Keep your secret if you like,” said Phyllis.

“Keep it if you CAN,” said Bobbie.

“I’ll keep it, right enough,” said Peter.

Between tea and supper there is an interval even in the most greedily
regulated families. At this time Mother was usually writing, and Mrs.
Viney had gone home.

Two nights after the dawning of Peter’s idea he beckoned the girls
mysteriously at the twilight hour.

“Come hither with me,” he said, “and bring the Roman Chariot.”

The Roman Chariot was a very old perambulator that had spent years of
retirement in the loft over the coach-house. The children had oiled its
works till it glided noiseless as a pneumatic bicycle, and answered to
the helm as it had probably done in its best days.

“Follow your dauntless leader,” said Peter, and led the way down the
hill towards the station.

Just above the station many rocks have pushed their heads out through
the turf as though they, like the children, were interested in the
railway.

In a little hollow between three rocks lay a heap of dried brambles and
heather.

Peter halted, turned over the brushwood with a well-scarred boot, and
said:--

“Here’s the first coal from the St. Peter’s Mine. We’ll take it home in
the chariot. Punctuality and despatch. All orders carefully attended to.
Any shaped lump cut to suit regular customers.”

The chariot was packed full of coal. And when it was packed it had to
be unpacked again because it was so heavy that it couldn’t be got up the
hill by the three children, not even when Peter harnessed himself to the
handle with his braces, and firmly grasping his waistband in one hand
pulled while the girls pushed behind.

Three journeys had to be made before the coal from Peter’s mine was
added to the heap of Mother’s coal in the cellar.

Afterwards Peter went out alone, and came back very black and
mysterious.

“I’ve been to my coal-mine,” he said; “to-morrow evening we’ll bring
home the black diamonds in the chariot.”

It was a week later that Mrs. Viney remarked to Mother how well this
last lot of coal was holding out.

The children hugged themselves and each other in complicated wriggles of
silent laughter as they listened on the stairs. They had all forgotten
by now that there had ever been any doubt in Peter’s mind as to whether
coal-mining was wrong.

But there came a dreadful night when the Station Master put on a pair
of old sand shoes that he had worn at the seaside in his summer holiday,
and crept out very quietly to the yard where the Sodom and Gomorrah heap
of coal was, with the whitewashed line round it. He crept out there, and
he waited like a cat by a mousehole. On the top of the heap something
small and dark was scrabbling and rattling furtively among the coal.

The Station Master concealed himself in the shadow of a brake-van that
had a little tin chimney and was labelled:--

     G. N. and S. R.
          34576
    Return at once to
  White Heather Sidings

and in this concealment he lurked till the small thing on the top of
the heap ceased to scrabble and rattle, came to the edge of the heap,
cautiously let itself down, and lifted something after it. Then the arm
of the Station Master was raised, the hand of the Station Master fell
on a collar, and there was Peter firmly held by the jacket, with an old
carpenter’s bag full of coal in his trembling clutch.

“So I’ve caught you at last, have I, you young thief?” said the Station
Master.

“I’m not a thief,” said Peter, as firmly as he could. “I’m a
coal-miner.”

“Tell that to the Marines,” said the Station Master.

“It would be just as true whoever I told it to,” said Peter.

“You’re right there,” said the man, who held him. “Stow your jaw, you
young rip, and come along to the station.”

“Oh, no,” cried in the darkness an agonised voice that was not Peter’s.

“Not the POLICE station!” said another voice from the darkness.

“Not yet,” said the Station Master. “The Railway Station first. Why,
it’s a regular gang. Any more of you?”

“Only us,” said Bobbie and Phyllis, coming out of the shadow of another
truck labelled Staveley Colliery, and bearing on it the legend in white
chalk: ‘Wanted in No. 1 Road.’

“What do you mean by spying on a fellow like this?” said Peter, angrily.

“Time someone did spy on you, _I_ think,” said the Station Master. “Come
along to the station.”

“Oh, DON’T!” said Bobbie. “Can’t you decide NOW what you’ll do to us?
It’s our fault just as much as Peter’s. We helped to carry the coal
away--and we knew where he got it.”

“No, you didn’t,” said Peter.

“Yes, we did,” said Bobbie. “We knew all the time. We only pretended we
didn’t just to humour you.”

Peter’s cup was full. He had mined for coal, he had struck coal, he had
been caught, and now he learned that his sisters had ‘humoured’ him.

“Don’t hold me!” he said. “I won’t run away.”

The Station Master loosed Peter’s collar, struck a match and looked at
them by its flickering light.

“Why,” said he, “you’re the children from the Three Chimneys up yonder.
So nicely dressed, too. Tell me now, what made you do such a thing?
Haven’t you ever been to church or learned your catechism or anything,
not to know it’s wicked to steal?” He spoke much more gently now, and
Peter said:--

“I didn’t think it was stealing. I was almost sure it wasn’t. I thought
if I took it from the outside part of the heap, perhaps it would be. But
in the middle I thought I could fairly count it only mining. It’ll
take thousands of years for you to burn up all that coal and get to the
middle parts.”

“Not quite. But did you do it for a lark or what?”

“Not much lark carting that beastly heavy stuff up the hill,” said
Peter, indignantly.

“Then why did you?” The Station Master’s voice was so much kinder now
that Peter replied:--

“You know that wet day? Well, Mother said we were too poor to have a
fire. We always had fires when it was cold at our other house, and--”

“DON’T!” interrupted Bobbie, in a whisper.

“Well,” said the Station Master, rubbing his chin thoughtfully, “I’ll
tell you what I’ll do. I’ll look over it this once. But you remember,
young gentleman, stealing is stealing, and what’s mine isn’t yours,
whether you call it mining or whether you don’t. Run along home.”

“Do you mean you aren’t going to do anything to us? Well, you are a
brick,” said Peter, with enthusiasm.

“You’re a dear,” said Bobbie.

“You’re a darling,” said Phyllis.

“That’s all right,” said the Station Master.

And on this they parted.

“Don’t speak to me,” said Peter, as the three went up the hill. “You’re
spies and traitors--that’s what you are.”

But the girls were too glad to have Peter between them, safe and free,
and on the way to Three Chimneys and not to the Police Station, to mind
much what he said.

“We DID say it was us as much as you,” said Bobbie, gently.

“Well--and it wasn’t.”

“It would have come to the same thing in Courts with judges,” said
Phyllis. “Don’t be snarky, Peter. It isn’t our fault your secrets are so
jolly easy to find out.” She took his arm, and he let her.

“There’s an awful lot of coal in the cellar, anyhow,” he went on.

“Oh, don’t!” said Bobbie. “I don’t think we ought to be glad about
THAT.”

“I don’t know,” said Peter, plucking up a spirit. “I’m not at all sure,
even now, that mining is a crime.”

But the girls were quite sure. And they were also quite sure that he was
quite sure, however little he cared to own it.



