CHAPTER XIV. The End.


Life at the Three Chimneys was never quite the same again after the old
gentleman came to see his grandson. Although they now knew his name,
the children never spoke of him by it--at any rate, when they were by
themselves. To them he was always the old gentleman, and I think he had
better be the old gentleman to us, too. It wouldn’t make him seem any
more real to you, would it, if I were to tell you that his name was
Snooks or Jenkins (which it wasn’t)?--and, after all, I must be allowed
to keep one secret. It’s the only one; I have told you everything else,
except what I am going to tell you in this chapter, which is the last.
At least, of course, I haven’t told you EVERYTHING. If I were to do
that, the book would never come to an end, and that would be a pity,
wouldn’t it?

Well, as I was saying, life at Three Chimneys was never quite the same
again. The cook and the housemaid were very nice (I don’t mind telling
you their names--they were Clara and Ethelwyn), but they told Mother
they did not seem to want Mrs. Viney, and that she was an old muddler.
So Mrs. Viney came only two days a week to do washing and ironing. Then
Clara and Ethelwyn said they could do the work all right if they weren’t
interfered with, and that meant that the children no longer got the tea
and cleared it away and washed up the tea-things and dusted the rooms.

This would have left quite a blank in their lives, although they
had often pretended to themselves and to each other that they hated
housework. But now that Mother had no writing and no housework to do,
she had time for lessons. And lessons the children had to do. However
nice the person who is teaching you may be, lessons are lessons all the
world over, and at their best are worse fun than peeling potatoes or
lighting a fire.

On the other hand, if Mother now had time for lessons, she also had time
for play, and to make up little rhymes for the children as she used
to do. She had not had much time for rhymes since she came to Three
Chimneys.

There was one very odd thing about these lessons. Whatever the children
were doing, they always wanted to be doing something else. When Peter
was doing his Latin, he thought it would be nice to be learning History
like Bobbie. Bobbie would have preferred Arithmetic, which was what
Phyllis happened to be doing, and Phyllis of course thought Latin much
the most interesting kind of lesson. And so on.

So, one day, when they sat down to lessons, each of them found a little
rhyme at its place. I put the rhymes in to show you that their Mother
really did understand a little how children feel about things, and also
the kind of words they use, which is the case with very few grown-up
people. I suppose most grown-ups have very bad memories, and have
forgotten how they felt when they were little. Of course, the verses are
supposed to be spoken by the children.

               PETER

     I once thought Caesar easy pap--
       How very soft I must have been!
     When they start Caesar with a chap
       He little know what that will mean.
     Oh, verbs are silly stupid things.
     I’d rather learn the dates of kings!

               BOBBIE

     The worst of all my lesson things
       Is learning who succeeded who
     In all the rows of queens and kings,
       With dates to everything they do:
     With dates enough to make you sick;--
     I wish it was Arithmetic!

               PHYLLIS

     Such pounds and pounds of apples fill
       My slate--what is the price you’d spend?
     You scratch the figures out until
       You cry upon the dividend.
     I’d break the slate and scream for joy
     If I did Latin like a boy!

This kind of thing, of course, made lessons much jollier. It is
something to know that the person who is teaching you sees that it is
not all plain sailing for you, and does not think that it is just your
stupidness that makes you not know your lessons till you’ve learned
them!

Then as Jim’s leg got better it was very pleasant to go up and sit with
him and hear tales about his school life and the other boys. There
was one boy, named Parr, of whom Jim seemed to have formed the lowest
possible opinion, and another boy named Wigsby Minor, for whose views
Jim had a great respect. Also there were three brothers named Paley, and
the youngest was called Paley Terts, and was much given to fighting.

Peter drank in all this with deep joy, and Mother seemed to have
listened with some interest, for one day she gave Jim a sheet of paper
on which she had written a rhyme about Parr, bringing in Paley and
Wigsby by name in a most wonderful way, as well as all the reasons Jim
had for not liking Parr, and Wigsby’s wise opinion on the matter. Jim
was immensely pleased. He had never had a rhyme written expressly for
him before. He read it till he knew it by heart and then he sent it to
Wigsby, who liked it almost as much as Jim did. Perhaps you may like it,
too.

               THE NEW BOY

     His name is Parr:  he says that he
     Is given bread and milk for tea.
     He says his father killed a bear.
     He says his mother cuts his hair.

     He wears goloshes when it’s wet.
     I’ve heard his people call him “Pet”!
     He has no proper sense of shame;
     He told the chaps his Christian name.

     He cannot wicket-keep at all,
     He’s frightened of a cricket ball.
     He reads indoors for hours and hours.
     He knows the names of beastly flowers.

     He says his French just like Mossoo--
     A beastly stuck-up thing to do--
     He won’t keep _cave_, shirks his turn
     And says he came to school to learn!

     He won’t play football, says it hurts;
     He wouldn’t fight with Paley Terts;
     He couldn’t whistle if he tried,
     And when we laughed at him he cried!

     Now Wigsby Minor says that Parr
     Is only like all new boys are.
     I know when _I_ first came to school
     I wasn’t such a jolly fool!

Jim could never understand how Mother could have been clever enough
to do it. To the others it seemed nice, but natural. You see they had
always been used to having a mother who could write verses just like
the way people talk, even to the shocking expression at the end of the
rhyme, which was Jim’s very own.

Jim taught Peter to play chess and draughts and dominoes, and altogether
it was a nice quiet time.

Only Jim’s leg got better and better, and a general feeling began to
spring up among Bobbie, Peter, and Phyllis that something ought to be
done to amuse him; not just games, but something really handsome. But it
was extraordinarily difficult to think of anything.

“It’s no good,” said Peter, when all of them had thought and thought
till their heads felt quite heavy and swollen; “if we can’t think of
anything to amuse him, we just can’t, and there’s an end of it. Perhaps
something will just happen of its own accord that he’ll like.”

“Things DO happen by themselves sometimes, without your making them,”
 said Phyllis, rather as though, usually, everything that happened in the
world was her doing.

“I wish something would happen,” said Bobbie, dreamily, “something
wonderful.”

And something wonderful did happen exactly four days after she had said
this. I wish I could say it was three days after, because in fairy tales
it is always three days after that things happen. But this is not a
fairy story, and besides, it really was four and not three, and I am
nothing if not strictly truthful.

They seemed to be hardly Railway children at all in those days, and as
the days went on each had an uneasy feeling about this which Phyllis
expressed one day.

“I wonder if the Railway misses us,” she said, plaintively. “We never go
to see it now.”

“It seems ungrateful,” said Bobbie; “we loved it so when we hadn’t
anyone else to play with.”

“Perks is always coming up to ask after Jim,” said Peter, “and the
signalman’s little boy is better. He told me so.”

“I didn’t mean the people,” explained Phyllis; “I meant the dear Railway
itself.”

“The thing I don’t like,” said Bobbie, on this fourth day, which was a
Tuesday, “is our having stopped waving to the 9.15 and sending our love
to Father by it.”

“Let’s begin again,” said Phyllis. And they did.

Somehow the change of everything that was made by having servants in
the house and Mother not doing any writing, made the time seem extremely
long since that strange morning at the beginning of things, when they
had got up so early and burnt the bottom out of the kettle and had apple
pie for breakfast and first seen the Railway.

It was September now, and the turf on the slope to the Railway was dry
and crisp. Little long grass spikes stood up like bits of gold wire,
frail blue harebells trembled on their tough, slender stalks, Gipsy
roses opened wide and flat their lilac-coloured discs, and the golden
stars of St. John’s Wort shone at the edges of the pool that lay halfway
to the Railway. Bobbie gathered a generous handful of the flowers and
thought how pretty they would look lying on the green-and-pink blanket
of silk-waste that now covered Jim’s poor broken leg.

“Hurry up,” said Peter, “or we shall miss the 9.15!”

“I can’t hurry more than I am doing,” said Phyllis. “Oh, bother it! My
bootlace has come undone AGAIN!”

“When you’re married,” said Peter, “your bootlace will come undone going
up the church aisle, and your man that you’re going to get married to
will tumble over it and smash his nose in on the ornamented pavement;
and then you’ll say you won’t marry him, and you’ll have to be an old
maid.”

“I shan’t,” said Phyllis. “I’d much rather marry a man with his nose
smashed in than not marry anybody.”

“It would be horrid to marry a man with a smashed nose, all the same,”
 went on Bobbie. “He wouldn’t be able to smell the flowers at the
wedding. Wouldn’t that be awful!”

“Bother the flowers at the wedding!” cried Peter. “Look! the signal’s
down. We must run!”

They ran. And once more they waved their handkerchiefs, without at all
minding whether the handkerchiefs were clean or not, to the 9.15.

“Take our love to Father!” cried Bobbie. And the others, too, shouted:--

“Take our love to Father!”

The old gentleman waved from his first-class carriage window. Quite
violently he waved. And there was nothing odd in that, for he always
had waved. But what was really remarkable was that from every window
handkerchiefs fluttered, newspapers signalled, hands waved wildly. The
train swept by with a rustle and roar, the little pebbles jumped and
danced under it as it passed, and the children were left looking at each
other.

“Well!” said Peter.

“WELL!” said Bobbie.

“_WELL!_” said Phyllis.

“Whatever on earth does that mean?” asked Peter, but he did not expect
any answer.

“_I_ don’t know,” said Bobbie. “Perhaps the old gentleman told the
people at his station to look out for us and wave. He knew we should
like it!”

Now, curiously enough, this was just what had happened. The old
gentleman, who was very well known and respected at his particular
station, had got there early that morning, and he had waited at the door
where the young man stands holding the interesting machine that clips
the tickets, and he had said something to every single passenger who
passed through that door. And after nodding to what the old gentleman
had said--and the nods expressed every shade of surprise, interest,
doubt, cheerful pleasure, and grumpy agreement--each passenger had gone
on to the platform and read one certain part of his newspaper. And when
the passengers got into the train, they had told the other passengers
who were already there what the old gentleman had said, and then the
other passengers had also looked at their newspapers and seemed very
astonished and, mostly, pleased. Then, when the train passed the fence
where the three children were, newspapers and hands and handkerchiefs
were waved madly, till all that side of the train was fluttery with
white like the pictures of the King’s Coronation in the biograph at
Maskelyne and Cook’s. To the children it almost seemed as though the
train itself was alive, and was at last responding to the love that they
had given it so freely and so long.

“It is most extraordinarily rum!” said Peter.

“Most stronery!” echoed Phyllis.

But Bobbie said, “Don’t you think the old gentleman’s waves seemed more
significating than usual?”

“No,” said the others.

“I do,” said Bobbie. “I thought he was trying to explain something to us
with his newspaper.”

“Explain what?” asked Peter, not unnaturally.

“_I_ don’t know,” Bobbie answered, “but I do feel most awfully funny. I
feel just exactly as if something was going to happen.”

“What is going to happen,” said Peter, “is that Phyllis’s stocking is
going to come down.”

This was but too true. The suspender had given way in the agitation of
the waves to the 9.15. Bobbie’s handkerchief served as first aid to the
injured, and they all went home.

Lessons were more than usually difficult to Bobbie that day. Indeed, she
disgraced herself so deeply over a quite simple sum about the division
of 48 pounds of meat and 36 pounds of bread among 144 hungry children
that Mother looked at her anxiously.

“Don’t you feel quite well, dear?” she asked.

“I don’t know,” was Bobbie’s unexpected answer. “I don’t know how
I feel. It isn’t that I’m lazy. Mother, will you let me off lessons
to-day? I feel as if I wanted to be quite alone by myself.”

“Yes, of course I’ll let you off,” said Mother; “but--”

Bobbie dropped her slate. It cracked just across the little green mark
that is so useful for drawing patterns round, and it was never the same
slate again. Without waiting to pick it up she bolted. Mother caught her
in the hall feeling blindly among the waterproofs and umbrellas for her
garden hat.

“What is it, my sweetheart?” said Mother. “You don’t feel ill, do you?”

“I DON’T know,” Bobbie answered, a little breathlessly, “but I want to
be by myself and see if my head really IS all silly and my inside all
squirmy-twisty.”

“Hadn’t you better lie down?” Mother said, stroking her hair back from
her forehead.

“I’d be more alive in the garden, I think,” said Bobbie.

But she could not stay in the garden. The hollyhocks and the asters and
the late roses all seemed to be waiting for something to happen. It was
one of those still, shiny autumn days, when everything does seem to be
waiting.

Bobbie could not wait.

“I’ll go down to the station,” she said, “and talk to Perks and ask
about the signalman’s little boy.”

So she went down. On the way she passed the old lady from the
Post-office, who gave her a kiss and a hug, but, rather to Bobbie’s
surprise, no words except:--

“God bless you, love--” and, after a pause, “run along--do.”

The draper’s boy, who had sometimes been a little less than civil and
a little more than contemptuous, now touched his cap, and uttered the
remarkable words:--

“‘Morning, Miss, I’m sure--”

The blacksmith, coming along with an open newspaper in his hand, was
even more strange in his manner. He grinned broadly, though, as a rule,
he was a man not given to smiles, and waved the newspaper long before
he came up to her. And as he passed her, he said, in answer to her “Good
morning”:--

“Good morning to you, Missie, and many of them! I wish you joy, that I
do!”

“Oh!” said Bobbie to herself, and her heart quickened its beats,
“something IS going to happen! I know it is--everyone is so odd, like
people are in dreams.”

The Station Master wrung her hand warmly. In fact he worked it up and
down like a pump-handle. But he gave her no reason for this unusually
enthusiastic greeting. He only said:--

“The 11.54’s a bit late, Miss--the extra luggage this holiday time,”
 and went away very quickly into that inner Temple of his into which even
Bobbie dared not follow him.

Perks was not to be seen, and Bobbie shared the solitude of the platform
with the Station Cat. This tortoiseshell lady, usually of a retiring
disposition, came to-day to rub herself against the brown stockings of
Bobbie with arched back, waving tail, and reverberating purrs.

“Dear me!” said Bobbie, stooping to stroke her, “how very kind everybody
is to-day--even you, Pussy!”

Perks did not appear until the 11.54 was signalled, and then he, like
everybody else that morning, had a newspaper in his hand.

“Hullo!” he said, “‘ere you are. Well, if THIS is the train, it’ll be
smart work! Well, God bless you, my dear! I see it in the paper, and
I don’t think I was ever so glad of anything in all my born days!” He
looked at Bobbie a moment, then said, “One I must have, Miss, and no
offence, I know, on a day like this ‘ere!” and with that he kissed her,
first on one cheek and then on the other.

“You ain’t offended, are you?” he asked anxiously. “I ain’t took too
great a liberty? On a day like this, you know--”

“No, no,” said Bobbie, “of course it’s not a liberty, dear Mr. Perks;
we love you quite as much as if you were an uncle of ours--but--on a day
like WHAT?”

“Like this ‘ere!” said Perks. “Don’t I tell you I see it in the paper?”

“Saw WHAT in the paper?” asked Bobbie, but already the 11.54 was
steaming into the station and the Station Master was looking at all the
places where Perks was not and ought to have been.

Bobbie was left standing alone, the Station Cat watching her from under
the bench with friendly golden eyes.

Of course you know already exactly what was going to happen. Bobbie was
not so clever. She had the vague, confused, expectant feeling that comes
to one’s heart in dreams. What her heart expected I can’t tell--perhaps
the very thing that you and I know was going to happen--but her mind
expected nothing; it was almost blank, and felt nothing but tiredness
and stupidness and an empty feeling, like your body has when you have
been a long walk and it is very far indeed past your proper dinner-time.

Only three people got out of the 11.54. The first was a countryman with
two baskety boxes full of live chickens who stuck their russet heads
out anxiously through the wicker bars; the second was Miss Peckitt, the
grocer’s wife’s cousin, with a tin box and three brown-paper parcels;
and the third--

“Oh! my Daddy, my Daddy!” That scream went like a knife into the heart
of everyone in the train, and people put their heads out of the windows
to see a tall pale man with lips set in a thin close line, and a little
girl clinging to him with arms and legs, while his arms went tightly
round her.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

“I knew something wonderful was going to happen,” said Bobbie, as they
went up the road, “but I didn’t think it was going to be this. Oh, my
Daddy, my Daddy!”

“Then didn’t Mother get my letter?” Father asked.

“There weren’t any letters this morning. Oh! Daddy! it IS really you,
isn’t it?”

The clasp of a hand she had not forgotten assured her that it was. “You
must go in by yourself, Bobbie, and tell Mother quite quietly that it’s
all right. They’ve caught the man who did it. Everyone knows now that it
wasn’t your Daddy.”

“_I_ always knew it wasn’t,” said Bobbie. “Me and Mother and our old
gentleman.”

“Yes,” he said, “it’s all his doing. Mother wrote and told me you had
found out. And she told me what you’d been to her. My own little girl!”
 They stopped a minute then.

And now I see them crossing the field. Bobbie goes into the house,
trying to keep her eyes from speaking before her lips have found the
right words to “tell Mother quite quietly” that the sorrow and the
struggle and the parting are over and done, and that Father has come
home.

I see Father walking in the garden, waiting--waiting. He is looking at
the flowers, and each flower is a miracle to eyes that all these months
of Spring and Summer have seen only flagstones and gravel and a little
grudging grass. But his eyes keep turning towards the house. And
presently he leaves the garden and goes to stand outside the nearest
door. It is the back door, and across the yard the swallows are
circling. They are getting ready to fly away from cold winds and keen
frost to the land where it is always summer. They are the same swallows
that the children built the little clay nests for.

Now the house door opens. Bobbie’s voice calls:--

“Come in, Daddy; come in!”

He goes in and the door is shut. I think we will not open the door or
follow him. I think that just now we are not wanted there. I think it
will be best for us to go quickly and quietly away. At the end of the
field, among the thin gold spikes of grass and the harebells and Gipsy
roses and St. John’s Wort, we may just take one last look, over our
shoulders, at the white house where neither we nor anyone else is wanted
now.
