CHAPTER VII. For valour.


I hope you don’t mind my telling you a good deal about Roberta. The fact
is I am growing very fond of her. The more I observe her the more I love
her. And I notice all sorts of things about her that I like.

For instance, she was quite oddly anxious to make other people happy.
And she could keep a secret, a tolerably rare accomplishment. Also she
had the power of silent sympathy. That sounds rather dull, I know, but
it’s not so dull as it sounds. It just means that a person is able
to know that you are unhappy, and to love you extra on that account,
without bothering you by telling you all the time how sorry she is
for you. That was what Bobbie was like. She knew that Mother was
unhappy--and that Mother had not told her the reason. So she just loved
Mother more and never said a single word that could let Mother know how
earnestly her little girl wondered what Mother was unhappy about. This
needs practice. It is not so easy as you might think.

Whatever happened--and all sorts of nice, pleasant ordinary things
happened--such as picnics, games, and buns for tea, Bobbie always had
these thoughts at the back of her mind. “Mother’s unhappy. Why? I don’t
know. She doesn’t want me to know. I won’t try to find out. But she
IS unhappy. Why? I don’t know. She doesn’t--” and so on, repeating and
repeating like a tune that you don’t know the stopping part of.

The Russian gentleman still took up a good deal of everybody’s thoughts.
All the editors and secretaries of Societies and Members of Parliament
had answered Mother’s letters as politely as they knew how; but none of
them could tell where the wife and children of Mr. Szezcpansky would be
likely to be. (Did I tell you that the Russian’s very Russian name was
that?)

Bobbie had another quality which you will hear differently described
by different people. Some of them call it interfering in other people’s
business--and some call it “helping lame dogs over stiles,” and some
call it “loving-kindness.” It just means trying to help people.

She racked her brains to think of some way of helping the Russian
gentleman to find his wife and children. He had learned a few words
of English now. He could say “Good morning,” and “Good night,” and
“Please,” and “Thank you,” and “Pretty,” when the children brought him
flowers, and “Ver’ good,” when they asked him how he had slept.

The way he smiled when he “said his English,” was, Bobbie felt, “just
too sweet for anything.” She used to think of his face because she
fancied it would help her to some way of helping him. But it did not.
Yet his being there cheered her because she saw that it made Mother
happier.

“She likes to have someone to be good to, even beside us,” said Bobbie.
“And I know she hated to let him have Father’s clothes. But I suppose it
‘hurt nice,’ or she wouldn’t have.”

For many and many a night after the day when she and Peter and Phyllis
had saved the train from wreck by waving their little red flannel flags,
Bobbie used to wake screaming and shivering, seeing again that horrible
mound, and the poor, dear trustful engine rushing on towards it--just
thinking that it was doing its swift duty, and that everything was clear
and safe. And then a warm thrill of pleasure used to run through her
at the remembrance of how she and Peter and Phyllis and the red flannel
petticoats had really saved everybody.

One morning a letter came. It was addressed to Peter and Bobbie and
Phyllis. They opened it with enthusiastic curiosity, for they did not
often get letters.

The letter said:--

“Dear Sir, and Ladies,--It is proposed to make a small presentation to
you, in commemoration of your prompt and courageous action in warning
the train on the --- inst., and thus averting what must, humanly
speaking, have been a terrible accident. The presentation will take
place at the --- Station at three o’clock on the 30th inst., if this
time and place will be convenient to you.

          “Yours faithfully,

                    “Jabez Inglewood.
“Secretary, Great Northern and Southern Railway Co.”

There never had been a prouder moment in the lives of the three
children. They rushed to Mother with the letter, and she also felt proud
and said so, and this made the children happier than ever.

“But if the presentation is money, you must say, ‘Thank you, but we’d
rather not take it,’” said Mother. “I’ll wash your Indian muslins at
once,” she added. “You must look tidy on an occasion like this.”

“Phil and I can wash them,” said Bobbie, “if you’ll iron them, Mother.”

Washing is rather fun. I wonder whether you’ve ever done it? This
particular washing took place in the back kitchen, which had a stone
floor and a very big stone sink under its window.

“Let’s put the bath on the sink,” said Phyllis; “then we can pretend
we’re out-of-doors washerwomen like Mother saw in France.”

“But they were washing in the cold river,” said Peter, his hands in his
pockets, “not in hot water.”

“This is a HOT river, then,” said Phyllis; “lend a hand with the bath,
there’s a dear.”

“I should like to see a deer lending a hand,” said Peter, but he lent
his.

“Now to rub and scrub and scrub and rub,” said Phyllis, hopping joyously
about as Bobbie carefully carried the heavy kettle from the kitchen
fire.

“Oh, no!” said Bobbie, greatly shocked; “you don’t rub muslin. You put
the boiled soap in the hot water and make it all frothy-lathery--and
then you shake the muslin and squeeze it, ever so gently, and all the
dirt comes out. It’s only clumsy things like tablecloths and sheets that
have to be rubbed.”

The lilac and the Gloire de Dijon roses outside the window swayed in the
soft breeze.

“It’s a nice drying day--that’s one thing,” said Bobbie, feeling very
grown up. “Oh, I do wonder what wonderful feelings we shall have when we
WEAR the Indian muslin dresses!”

“Yes, so do I,” said Phyllis, shaking and squeezing the muslin in quite
a professional manner.

“NOW we squeeze out the soapy water. NO--we mustn’t twist them--and then
rinse them. I’ll hold them while you and Peter empty the bath and get
clean water.”

“A presentation! That means presents,” said Peter, as his sisters,
having duly washed the pegs and wiped the line, hung up the dresses to
dry. “Whatever will it be?”

“It might be anything,” said Phyllis; “what I’ve always wanted is a Baby
elephant--but I suppose they wouldn’t know that.”

“Suppose it was gold models of steam-engines?” said Bobbie.

“Or a big model of the scene of the prevented accident,” suggested
Peter, “with a little model train, and dolls dressed like us and the
engine-driver and fireman and passengers.”

“Do you LIKE,” said Bobbie, doubtfully, drying her hands on the rough
towel that hung on a roller at the back of the scullery door, “do you
LIKE us being rewarded for saving a train?”

“Yes, I do,” said Peter, downrightly; “and don’t you try to come it over
us that you don’t like it, too. Because I know you do.”

“Yes,” said Bobbie, doubtfully, “I know I do. But oughtn’t we to be
satisfied with just having done it, and not ask for anything more?”

“Who did ask for anything more, silly?” said her brother; “Victoria
Cross soldiers don’t ASK for it; but they’re glad enough to get it all
the same. Perhaps it’ll be medals. Then, when I’m very old indeed, I
shall show them to my grandchildren and say, ‘We only did our duty,’ and
they’ll be awfully proud of me.”

“You have to be married,” warned Phyllis, “or you don’t have any
grandchildren.”

“I suppose I shall HAVE to be married some day,” said Peter, “but it
will be an awful bother having her round all the time. I’d like to marry
a lady who had trances, and only woke up once or twice a year.”

“Just to say you were the light of her life and then go to sleep again.
Yes. That wouldn’t be bad,” said Bobbie.

“When _I_ get married,” said Phyllis, “I shall want him to want me to be
awake all the time, so that I can hear him say how nice I am.”

“I think it would be nice,” said Bobbie, “to marry someone very poor,
and then you’d do all the work and he’d love you most frightfully, and
see the blue wood smoke curling up among the trees from the domestic
hearth as he came home from work every night. I say--we’ve got to answer
that letter and say that the time and place WILL be convenient to us.
There’s the soap, Peter. WE’RE both as clean as clean. That pink box of
writing paper you had on your birthday, Phil.”

It took some time to arrange what should be said. Mother had gone back
to her writing, and several sheets of pink paper with scalloped gilt
edges and green four-leaved shamrocks in the corner were spoiled before
the three had decided what to say. Then each made a copy and signed it
with its own name.

The threefold letter ran:--

“Dear Mr. Jabez Inglewood,--Thank you very much. We did not want to be
rewarded but only to save the train, but we are glad you think so and
thank you very much. The time and place you say will be quite convenient
to us. Thank you very much.

          “Your affecate little friend,”

Then came the name, and after it:--

“P.S. Thank you very much.”

“Washing is much easier than ironing,” said Bobbie, taking the clean dry
dresses off the line. “I do love to see things come clean. Oh--I don’t
know how we shall wait till it’s time to know what presentation they’re
going to present!”

When at last--it seemed a very long time after--it was THE day,
the three children went down to the station at the proper time. And
everything that happened was so odd that it seemed like a dream. The
Station Master came out to meet them--in his best clothes, as Peter
noticed at once--and led them into the waiting room where once they had
played the advertisement game. It looked quite different now. A carpet
had been put down--and there were pots of roses on the mantelpiece and
on the window ledges--green branches stuck up, like holly and laurel
are at Christmas, over the framed advertisement of Cook’s Tours and the
Beauties of Devon and the Paris Lyons Railway. There were quite a
number of people there besides the Porter--two or three ladies in
smart dresses, and quite a crowd of gentlemen in high hats and frock
coats--besides everybody who belonged to the station. They recognized
several people who had been in the train on the red-flannel-petticoat
day. Best of all their own old gentleman was there, and his coat and hat
and collar seemed more than ever different from anyone else’s. He shook
hands with them and then everybody sat down on chairs, and a gentleman
in spectacles--they found out afterwards that he was the District
Superintendent--began quite a long speech--very clever indeed. I am not
going to write the speech down. First, because you would think it dull;
and secondly, because it made all the children blush so, and get so hot
about the ears that I am quite anxious to get away from this part of the
subject; and thirdly, because the gentleman took so many words to say
what he had to say that I really haven’t time to write them down. He
said all sorts of nice things about the children’s bravery and presence
of mind, and when he had done he sat down, and everyone who was there
clapped and said, “Hear, hear.”

And then the old gentleman got up and said things, too. It was very like
a prize-giving. And then he called the children one by one, by their
names, and gave each of them a beautiful gold watch and chain. And
inside the watches were engraved after the name of the watch’s new
owner:--

“From the Directors of the Northern and Southern Railway in grateful
recognition of the courageous and prompt action which averted an
accident on --- 1905.”

The watches were the most beautiful you can possibly imagine, and each
one had a blue leather case to live in when it was at home.

“You must make a speech now and thank everyone for their kindness,”
 whispered the Station Master in Peter’s ear and pushed him forward.
“Begin ‘Ladies and Gentlemen,’” he added.

Each of the children had already said “Thank you,” quite properly.

“Oh, dear,” said Peter, but he did not resist the push.

“Ladies and Gentlemen,” he said in a rather husky voice. Then there
was a pause, and he heard his heart beating in his throat. “Ladies and
Gentlemen,” he went on with a rush, “it’s most awfully good of you, and
we shall treasure the watches all our lives--but really we don’t deserve
it because what we did wasn’t anything, really. At least, I mean it
was awfully exciting, and what I mean to say--thank you all very, very
much.”

The people clapped Peter more than they had done the District
Superintendent, and then everybody shook hands with them, and as soon as
politeness would let them, they got away, and tore up the hill to Three
Chimneys with their watches in their hands.

It was a wonderful day--the kind of day that very seldom happens to
anybody and to most of us not at all.

“I did want to talk to the old gentleman about something else,” said
Bobbie, “but it was so public--like being in church.”

“What did you want to say?” asked Phyllis.

“I’ll tell you when I’ve thought about it more,” said Bobbie.

So when she had thought a little more she wrote a letter.

“My dearest old gentleman,” it said; “I want most awfully to ask you
something. If you could get out of the train and go by the next, it
would do. I do not want you to give me anything. Mother says we ought
not to. And besides, we do not want any THINGS. Only to talk to you
about a Prisoner and Captive. Your loving little friend,

          “Bobbie.”

She got the Station Master to give the letter to the old gentleman, and
next day she asked Peter and Phyllis to come down to the station with
her at the time when the train that brought the old gentleman from town
would be passing through.

She explained her idea to them--and they approved thoroughly.

They had all washed their hands and faces, and brushed their hair, and
were looking as tidy as they knew how. But Phyllis, always unlucky, had
upset a jug of lemonade down the front of her dress. There was no time
to change--and the wind happening to blow from the coal yard, her frock
was soon powdered with grey, which stuck to the sticky lemonade stains
and made her look, as Peter said, “like any little gutter child.”

It was decided that she should keep behind the others as much as
possible.

“Perhaps the old gentleman won’t notice,” said Bobbie. “The aged are
often weak in the eyes.”

There was no sign of weakness, however, in the eyes, or in any other
part of the old gentleman, as he stepped from the train and looked up
and down the platform.

The three children, now that it came to the point, suddenly felt that
rush of deep shyness which makes your ears red and hot, your hands warm
and wet, and the tip of your nose pink and shiny.

“Oh,” said Phyllis, “my heart’s thumping like a steam-engine--right
under my sash, too.”

“Nonsense,” said Peter, “people’s hearts aren’t under their sashes.”

“I don’t care--mine is,” said Phyllis.

“If you’re going to talk like a poetry-book,” said Peter, “my heart’s in
my mouth.”

“My heart’s in my boots--if you come to that,” said Roberta; “but do
come on--he’ll think we’re idiots.”

“He won’t be far wrong,” said Peter, gloomily. And they went forward to
meet the old gentleman.

“Hullo,” he said, shaking hands with them all in turn. “This is a very
great pleasure.”

“It WAS good of you to get out,” Bobbie said, perspiring and polite.

He took her arm and drew her into the waiting room where she and the
others had played the advertisement game the day they found the Russian.
Phyllis and Peter followed. “Well?” said the old gentleman, giving
Bobbie’s arm a kind little shake before he let it go. “Well? What is
it?”

“Oh, please!” said Bobbie.

“Yes?” said the old gentleman.

“What I mean to say--” said Bobbie.

“Well?” said the old gentleman.

“It’s all very nice and kind,” said she.

“But?” he said.

“I wish I might say something,” she said.

“Say it,” said he.

“Well, then,” said Bobbie--and out came the story of the Russian who
had written the beautiful book about poor people, and had been sent to
prison and to Siberia for just that.

“And what we want more than anything in the world is to find his wife
and children for him,” said Bobbie, “but we don’t know how. But you must
be most horribly clever, or you wouldn’t be a Direction of the Railway.
And if YOU knew how--and would? We’d rather have that than anything else
in the world. We’d go without the watches, even, if you could sell them
and find his wife with the money.”

And the others said so, too, though not with so much enthusiasm.

“Hum,” said the old gentleman, pulling down the white waistcoat that
had the big gilt buttons on it, “what did you say the name
was--Fryingpansky?”

“No, no,” said Bobbie earnestly. “I’ll write it down for you. It doesn’t
really look at all like that except when you say it. Have you a bit of
pencil and the back of an envelope?” she asked.

The old gentleman got out a gold pencil-case and a beautiful,
sweet-smelling, green Russian leather note-book and opened it at a new
page.

“Here,” he said, “write here.”

She wrote down “Szezcpansky,” and said:--

“That’s how you write it. You CALL it Shepansky.”

The old gentleman took out a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles and fitted
them on his nose. When he had read the name, he looked quite different.

“THAT man? Bless my soul!” he said. “Why, I’ve read his book! It’s
translated into every European language. A fine book--a noble book. And
so your mother took him in--like the good Samaritan. Well, well. I’ll
tell you what, youngsters--your mother must be a very good woman.”

“Of course she is,” said Phyllis, in astonishment.

“And you’re a very good man,” said Bobbie, very shy, but firmly resolved
to be polite.

“You flatter me,” said the old gentleman, taking off his hat with a
flourish. “And now am I to tell you what I think of you?”

“Oh, please don’t,” said Bobbie, hastily.

“Why?” asked the old gentleman.

“I don’t exactly know,” said Bobbie. “Only--if it’s horrid, I don’t want
you to; and if it’s nice, I’d rather you didn’t.”

The old gentleman laughed.

“Well, then,” he said, “I’ll only just say that I’m very glad you came
to me about this--very glad, indeed. And I shouldn’t be surprised if I
found out something very soon. I know a great many Russians in London,
and every Russian knows HIS name. Now tell me all about yourselves.”

He turned to the others, but there was only one other, and that was
Peter. Phyllis had disappeared.

“Tell me all about yourself,” said the old gentleman again. And, quite
naturally, Peter was stricken dumb.

“All right, we’ll have an examination,” said the old gentleman; “you two
sit on the table, and I’ll sit on the bench and ask questions.”

He did, and out came their names and ages--their Father’s name and
business--how long they had lived at Three Chimneys and a great deal
more.

The questions were beginning to turn on a herring and a half for three
halfpence, and a pound of lead and a pound of feathers, when the door of
the waiting room was kicked open by a boot; as the boot entered everyone
could see that its lace was coming undone--and in came Phyllis, very
slowly and carefully.

In one hand she carried a large tin can, and in the other a thick slice
of bread and butter.

“Afternoon tea,” she announced proudly, and held the can and the bread
and butter out to the old gentleman, who took them and said:--

“Bless my soul!”

“Yes,” said Phyllis.

“It’s very thoughtful of you,” said the old gentleman, “very.”

“But you might have got a cup,” said Bobbie, “and a plate.”

“Perks always drinks out of the can,” said Phyllis, flushing red. “I
think it was very nice of him to give it me at all--let alone cups and
plates,” she added.

“So do I,” said the old gentleman, and he drank some of the tea and
tasted the bread and butter.

And then it was time for the next train, and he got into it with many
good-byes and kind last words.

“Well,” said Peter, when they were left on the platform, and the
tail-lights of the train disappeared round the corner, “it’s my belief
that we’ve lighted a candle to-day--like Latimer, you know, when he was
being burned--and there’ll be fireworks for our Russian before long.”

And so there were.

It wasn’t ten days after the interview in the waiting room that the
three children were sitting on the top of the biggest rock in the field
below their house watching the 5.15 steam away from the station along
the bottom of the valley. They saw, too, the few people who had got out
at the station straggling up the road towards the village--and they saw
one person leave the road and open the gate that led across the fields
to Three Chimneys and to nowhere else.

“Who on earth!” said Peter, scrambling down.

“Let’s go and see,” said Phyllis.

So they did. And when they got near enough to see who the person was,
they saw it was their old gentleman himself, his brass buttons winking
in the afternoon sunshine, and his white waistcoat looking whiter than
ever against the green of the field.

“Hullo!” shouted the children, waving their hands.

“Hullo!” shouted the old gentleman, waving his hat.

Then the three started to run--and when they got to him they hardly had
breath left to say:--

“How do you do?”

“Good news,” said he. “I’ve found your Russian friend’s wife and
child--and I couldn’t resist the temptation of giving myself the
pleasure of telling him.”

But as he looked at Bobbie’s face he felt that he COULD resist that
temptation.

“Here,” he said to her, “you run on and tell him. The other two will
show me the way.”

Bobbie ran. But when she had breathlessly panted out the news to the
Russian and Mother sitting in the quiet garden--when Mother’s face had
lighted up so beautifully, and she had said half a dozen quick French
words to the Exile--Bobbie wished that she had NOT carried the news. For
the Russian sprang up with a cry that made Bobbie’s heart leap and then
tremble--a cry of love and longing such as she had never heard. Then he
took Mother’s hand and kissed it gently and reverently--and then he sank
down in his chair and covered his face with his hands and sobbed. Bobbie
crept away. She did not want to see the others just then.

But she was as gay as anybody when the endless French talking was over,
when Peter had torn down to the village for buns and cakes, and the
girls had got tea ready and taken it out into the garden.

The old gentleman was most merry and delightful. He seemed to be able
to talk in French and English almost at the same moment, and Mother did
nearly as well. It was a delightful time. Mother seemed as if she could
not make enough fuss about the old gentleman, and she said yes at once
when he asked if he might present some “goodies” to his little friends.

The word was new to the children--but they guessed that it meant sweets,
for the three large pink and green boxes, tied with green ribbon, which
he took out of his bag, held unheard-of layers of beautiful chocolates.

The Russian’s few belongings were packed, and they all saw him off at
the station.

Then Mother turned to the old gentleman and said:--

“I don’t know how to thank you for EVERYTHING. It has been a real
pleasure to me to see you. But we live very quietly. I am so sorry that
I can’t ask you to come and see us again.”

The children thought this very hard. When they HAD made a friend--and
such a friend--they would dearly have liked him to come and see them
again.

What the old gentleman thought they couldn’t tell. He only said:--

“I consider myself very fortunate, Madam, to have been received once at
your house.”

“Ah,” said Mother, “I know I must seem surly and ungrateful--but--”

“You could never seem anything but a most charming and gracious lady,”
 said the old gentleman, with another of his bows.

And as they turned to go up the hill, Bobbie saw her Mother’s face.

“How tired you look, Mammy,” she said; “lean on me.”

“It’s my place to give Mother my arm,” said Peter. “I’m the head man of
the family when Father’s away.”

Mother took an arm of each.

“How awfully nice,” said Phyllis, skipping joyfully, “to think of the
dear Russian embracing his long-lost wife. The baby must have grown a
lot since he saw it.”

“Yes,” said Mother.

“I wonder whether Father will think I’VE grown,” Phyllis went on,
skipping still more gaily. “I have grown already, haven’t I, Mother?”

“Yes,” said Mother, “oh, yes,” and Bobbie and Peter felt her hands
tighten on their arms.

“Poor old Mammy, you ARE tired,” said Peter.

Bobbie said, “Come on, Phil; I’ll race you to the gate.”

And she started the race, though she hated doing it. YOU know why Bobbie
did that. Mother only thought that Bobbie was tired of walking slowly.
Even Mothers, who love you better than anyone else ever will, don’t
always understand.



