CHAPTER V. HOW PRINCESS ANGELICA TOOK A LITTLE MAID

One day, when the Princess Angelica was quite a little girl, she
was walking in the garden of the palace, with Mrs. Gruffanuff, the
governess, holding a parasol over her head, to keep her sweet complexion
from the freckles, and Angelica was carrying a bun, to feed the swans
and ducks in the royal pond.

They had not reached the duck-pond, when there came toddling up to them
such a funny little girl! She had a great quantity of hair blowing about
her chubby little cheeks, and looked as if she had not been washed or
combed for ever so long. She wore a ragged bit of a cloak, and had only
one shoe on.

‘You little wretch, who let you in here?’ asked Mrs. Gruffanuff.

‘Div me dat bun,’ said the little girl, ‘me vely hungy.’

‘Hungry! what is that?’ asked Princess Angelica, and gave the child the
bun.

‘Oh, Princess!’ says Mrs. Gruffanuff, ‘how good, how kind, how truly
angelical you are! See, Your Majesties,’ she said to the King and Queen,
who now came up, along with their nephew, Prince Giglio, ‘how kind the
Princess is! She met this little dirty wretch in the garden--I can’t
tell how she came in here, or why the guards did not shoot her dead at
the gate!--and the dear darling of a Princess has given her the whole of
her bun!’

‘I didn’t want it,’ said Angelical

‘But you are a darling little angel all the same,’ says the governess.

‘Yes; I know I am,’ said Angelical ‘Dirty little girl, don’t you think
I am very pretty?’ Indeed, she had on the finest of little dresses and
hats; and, as her hair was carefully curled, she really looked very
well.

‘Oh, pooty, pooty!’ says the little girl, capering about, laughing, and
dancing, and munching her bun; and as she ate it she began to sing, ‘Oh,
what fun to have a plum bun! how I wis it never was done!’ At which,
and her funny accent, Angelica, Giglio, and the King and Queen began to
laugh very merrily.

‘I can dance as well as sing,’ says the little girl. ‘I can dance, and I
can sing, and I can do all sorts of ting.’ And she ran to a flower-bed,
and pulling a few polyanthuses, rhododendrons, and other flowers, made
herself a little wreath, and danced before the King and Queen so drolly
and prettily, that everybody was delighted.

‘Who was your mother--who were your relations, little girl?’ said the
Queen.

The little girl said, ‘Little lion was my brudder; great big lioness my
mudder; neber heard of any udder.’ And she capered away on her one shoe,
and everybody was exceedingly diverted.

So Angelica said to the Queen, ‘Mamma, my parrot flew away yesterday out
of its cage, and I don’t care any more for any of my toys; and I think
this funny little dirty child will amuse me. I will take her home, and
give her some of my old frocks.’

‘Oh, the generous darling!’ says Mrs. Gruffanuff.

‘Which I have worn ever so many times, and am quite tired of,’ Angelica
went on; ‘and she shall be my little maid. Will you come home with me,
little dirty girl?’

The child clapped her hands, and said, ‘Go home with you--yes! You pooty
Princess!--Have a nice dinner, and wear a new dress!’

And they all laughed again, and took home the child to the palace,
where, when she was washed and combed, and had one of the Princess’s
frocks given to her, she looked as handsome as Angelica, almost. Not
that Angelica ever thought so; for this little lady never imagined
that anybody in the world could be as pretty, as good, or as clever as
herself. In order that the little girl should not become too proud and
conceited, Mrs. Gruffanuff took her old ragged mantle and one shoe, and
put them into a glass box, with a card laid upon them, upon which was
written, ‘These were the old clothes in which little BETSINDA was found
when the great goodness and admirable kindness of Her Royal Highness the
Princess Angelica received this little outcast.’ And the date was added,
and the box locked up.

For a while little Betsinda was a great favourite with the Princess, and
she danced, and sang, and made her little rhymes, to amuse her mistress.
But then the Princess got a monkey, and afterwards a little dog, and
afterwards a doll, and did not care for Betsinda any more, who became
very melancholy and quiet, and sang no more funny songs, because nobody
cared to hear her. And then, as she grew older, she was made a little
lady’s-maid to the Princess; and though she had no wages, she worked
and mended, and put Angelica’s hair in papers, and was never cross when
scolded, and was always eager to please her mistress, and was always
up early and to bed late, and at hand when wanted, and in fact became
a perfect little maid. So the two girls grew up, and, when the Princess
came out, Betsinda was never tired of waiting on her; and made her
dresses better than the best milliner, and was useful in a hundred ways.
Whilst the Princess was having her masters, Betsinda would sit and watch
them; and in this way she picked up a great deal of learn ing; for she
was always awake, though her mistress was not, and listened to the wise
professors when Angelica was yawning or thinking of the next ball. And
when the dancing-master came, Betsinda learned along with Angelica;
and when the music-master came, she watched him, and practiced the
Princess’s pieces when Angelica was away at balls and parties; and when
the drawing-master came, she took note of all he said and did; and the
same with French, Italian, and all other languages--she learned them
from the teacher who came to Angelica. When the Princess was going out
of an evening she would say, ‘My good Betsinda, you may as well finish
what I have begun.’ ‘Yes, miss,’ Betsinda would say, and sit down very
cheerful, not to FINISH what Angelica began, but to DO it.

For instance, the Princess would begin a head of a warrior, let us say,
and when it was begun it was something like this--

But when it was done, the warrior was like this--

(only handsomer still if possible), and the Princess put her name to the
drawing; and the Court and King and Queen, and above all poor Giglio,
admired the picture of all things, and said, ‘Was there ever a genius
like Angelica?’ So, I am sorry to say, was it with the Princess’s
embroidery and other accomplishments; and Angelica actually believed
that she did these things herself, and received all the flattery of
the Court as if every word of it was true. Thus she began to think that
there was no young woman in all the world equal to herself, and that no
young man was good enough for her. As for Betsinda, as she heard none of
these praises, she was not puffed up by them, and being a most grateful,
good-natured girl, she was only too anxious to do everything which might
give her mistress pleasure. Now you begin to perceive that Angelica
had faults of her own, and was by no means such a wonder of wonders as
people represented Her Royal Highness to be.




