BOOK 6. _FORTUNATUS REX & CO._


THERE was once a lady who found herself in middle life with but a
slight income. Knowing herself to be insufficiently educated to be
able to practise any other trade or calling, she of course decided,
without hesitation, to enter the profession of teaching. She opened a
very select Boarding School for Young Ladies. The highest references
were given and required. And in order to keep her school as select as
possible, Miss Fitzroy Robinson had a brass plate fastened on to the
door, with an inscription in small polite lettering. (You have, of
course, heard of the “polite letters.” Well, it was with these that
Miss Fitzroy Robinson’s door-plate was engraved.)

  “SELECT BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT FOR THE
   DAUGHTERS OF RESPECTABLE MONARCHS.”

A great many kings who were not at all respectable would have given
their royal ears to be allowed to send their daughters to this school,
but Miss Fitzroy Robinson was very firm about references, and the
consequence was that all the really high-class kings were only too
pleased to be permitted to pay ten thousand pounds a year for their
daughters’ education. And so Miss Fitzroy Robinson was able to lay
aside a few pounds as a provision for her old age. And all the money
she saved was invested in land.

Only one monarch refused to send his daughter to Miss Fitzroy Robinson,
on the ground that so cheap a school could not be a really select one,
and it was found out afterwards that his references were not at all
satisfactory.

There were only six boarders, and of course the best masters were
engaged to teach the royal pupils everything which their parents wished
them to learn, and as the girls were never asked to do lessons except
when they felt quite inclined, they all said it was the nicest school
in the world, and cried at the very thought of being taken away. Thus
it happened that the six pupils were quite grown up and were just
becoming parlour boarders when events began to occur. Princess Daisy,
the daughter of King Fortunatus, the ruling sovereign, was the only
little girl in the school.

Now it was when she had been at school about a year, that a ring came
at the front door-bell, and the maid-servant came to the schoolroom
with a visiting card held in the corner of her apron—for her hands were
wet because it was washing-day.

“A gentleman to see you, Miss,” she said; and Miss Fitzroy Robinson was
quite fluttered because she thought it might be a respectable monarch,
with a daughter who wanted teaching.

But when she looked at the card she left off fluttering, and said,
“Dear me!” under her breath, because she was very genteel. If she had
been vulgar like some of us she would have said “Bother!” and if she
had been more vulgar than, I hope, any of us are, she might have said
“Drat the man!” The card was large and shiny and had gold letters on
it. Miss Fitzroy Robinson read:—

  Chevalier Doloro De Lara
  Professor of Magic (white)
  and the Black Art.
  Pupils instructed at their own residences.
  No extras.
  Special terms for Schools. Evening Parties
  attended.

Miss Fitzroy Robinson laid down her book—she never taught without a
book—smoothed her yellow cap and her grey curls and went into the front
parlour to see her visitor. He bowed low at sight of her. He was very
tall and hungry-looking, with black eyes, and an indescribable mouth.

“It is indeed a pleasure,” said he, smiling so as to show every one of
his thirty-two teeth—a very polite, but very difficult thing to do—“it
is indeed a pleasure to meet once more my old pupil.”

“The pleasure is mutual, I am sure,” said Miss Fitzroy Robinson. If it
is sometimes impossible to be polite and truthful at the same moment,
that is not my fault, nor Miss Fitzroy Robinson’s.

“I have been travelling about,” said the Professor, still smiling
immeasurably, “increasing my stock of wisdom. Ah, dear lady—we live and
learn, do we not? And now I am really a far more competent teacher than
when I had the honour of instructing you. May I hope for an engagement
as Professor in your Academy?”

“I have not yet been able to arrange for a regular course of Magic,”
said the schoolmistress; “it is a subject in which parents, especially
royal ones, take but too little interest.”

“It was your favourite study,” said the professor.

“Yes—but—well, no doubt some day——”

“But I want an engagement _now_,” said he, looking hungrier than ever;
“a thousand pounds for thirteen lessons—to _you_, dear lady.”

“It’s quite impossible,” said she, and she spoke firmly, for she knew
from history how dangerous it is for a Magician to be allowed anywhere
near a princess. Some harm almost always comes of it.

“Oh, very well!” said the Professor.

“You see my pupils are all princesses,” she went on, “they don’t
require the use of magic, they can get all they want without it.”

“Then it’s ‘_No_’?” said he.

“It’s ‘No thank you kindly,’” said she.

Then, before she could stop him, he sprang past her out at the door,
and she heard his boots on the oilcloth of the passage. She flew after
him just in time to have the schoolroom door slammed and locked in her
face.

“Well, I never!” said Miss Fitzroy Robinson. She hastened to the top
of the house and hurried down the schoolroom chimney, which had been
made with steps, in case of fire or other emergency. She stepped out of
the grate on to the schoolroom hearthrug just one second too late. The
seven Princesses were all gone, and the Professor of Magic stood alone
among the ink-stained desks, smiling the largest smile Miss Fitzroy
Robinson had seen yet.

“Oh, you naughty, bad, wicked man, you!” said she, shaking the school
ruler at him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day was Saturday, and the King of the country called as usual
to take his daughter Daisy out to spend her half holiday. The servant
who opened the door had a coarse apron on and cinders in her hair,
and the King thought it was sackcloth and ashes, and said so a little
anxiously, but the girl said, “No, I’ve only been a-doing of the
kitchen range—though, for the matter of that—but you’d best see missus
herself.”

So the King was shown into the best parlour where the tasteful
wax-flowers were, and the antimacassars and water-colour drawings
executed by the pupils, and the wool mats which Miss Fitzroy
Robinson’s bed-ridden aunt made so beautifully. A delightful parlour
full of the traces of the refining touch of a woman’s hand.

Miss Fitzroy Robinson came in slowly and sadly. Her gown was neatly
made of sack-cloth—with an ingenious trimming of small cinders sewn on
gold braid—and some larger-sized cinders dangled by silken threads from
the edge of her lace cap.

The King saw at once that she was annoyed about something. “I hope I’m
not too early,” said he.

“Your Majesty,” she answered, “not at all. You are always punctual, as
stated in your references. Something has happened. I will not aggravate
your misfortunes by breaking them to you. Your daughter Daisy, the
pride and treasure of our little circle, has disappeared. Her six royal
companions are with her. For the present all are safe, but at the
moment I am unable to lay my hand on any one of the seven.”

The King sat down heavily on part of the handsome walnut and rep suite
(ladies’ and gentlemen’s easy-chairs, couch and six occasional chairs)
and gasped miserably. He could not find words. But the schoolmistress
had written down what she was going to say on a slate and learned it
off by heart, so she was able to go on fluently.

“Your Majesty, I am not wholly to blame—hang me if I am—I mean hang me
if you must; but first allow me to have the honour of offering to you
one or two explanatory remarks.”

With this she sat down and told him the whole story of the Professor’s
visit, only stopping exactly where I stopped when I was telling it to
you just now.

The King listened, plucking nervously at the fringe of a purple and
crimson antimacassar.

“I never _was_ satisfied with the Professor’s methods,” said Miss
Fitzroy Robinson sadly; “and I always had my doubts as to his moral
character, doubts now set at rest for ever. After concluding my course
of instruction with him some years ago I took a series of lessons from
a far more efficient master, and thanks to those lessons, which were, I
may mention, extremely costly, I was mercifully enabled to put a spoke
in the wheel of the unprincipled ruffian——”

“Did you save the Princesses?” cried the King.

“No; but I can if your Majesty and the other parents will leave the
matter entirely in my hands.”

“It’s rather a serious matter,” said the King; “my poor little Daisy——”

“I would ask you,” said the schoolmistress with dignity, “not to attach
too much importance to this event. Of course it is regrettable, but
unpleasant accidents occur in all schools, and the consequences of them
can usually be averted by the exercise of tact and judgment.”

“I ought to hang you, you know,” said the King doubtfully.

“No doubt,” said Miss Fitzroy Robinson, “and if you do you’ll never
see your Daisy again. Your duty as a parent—yes—and your duty to
me—conflicting duties are very painful things.”

“But can I trust you?”

“I may remind you,” said she, drawing herself up so that the cinders
rattled again, “that we exchanged satisfactory references at the
commencement of our business relations.”

The King rose. “Well, Miss Fitzroy Robinson,” he said, “I have been
entirely satisfied with Daisy’s progress since she has been in your
charge, and I feel I cannot do better than leave this matter entirely
in your able hands.”

The schoolmistress made him a curtsey, and he went back to his marble
palace a broken-hearted monarch, with his crown all on one side and his
poor, dear nose red with weeping.

The select boarding establishment was shut up.

Time went on and no news came of the lost Princesses.

The King found but little comfort in the fact that his other child,
Prince Denis, was still spared to him. Denis was all very well and a
nice little boy in his way, but a boy is not a girl.

The Queen was much more broken-hearted than the King, but of course
she had the housekeeping to see to and the making of the pickles and
preserves and the young Prince’s stockings to knit, so she had not much
time for weeping, and after a year she said to the King—

“My dear, you ought to do something to distract your mind. It’s
unkinglike to sit and cry all day. Now, do make an effort; do something
useful, if it’s only opening a bazaar or laying a foundation stone.”

“I am frightened of bazaars,” said the King; “they are like bees—they
buzz and worry; but foundation stones——” And after that he began to sit
and think sometimes, without crying, and to make notes on the backs of
old envelopes. So the Queen felt that she had not spoken quite in vain.

A month later the suggestion of foundation stones bore fruit.

The King floated a company, and Fortunatus Rex & Co. became almost at
once the largest speculative builders in the world.

Perhaps you do not know what a speculative builder is. I’ll tell you
what the King and his Co. did, and then you will know.

They bought all the pretty woods and fields they could get and cut them
up into squares, and grubbed up the trees and the grass and put streets
there and lamp-posts and ugly little yellow brick houses, in the hopes
that people would want to live in them. And curiously enough people
did. So the King and his Co. made quite a lot of money.

It is curious that nearly all the great fortunes are made by turning
beautiful things into ugly ones. Making beauty out of ugliness is very
ill-paid work.

The ugly little streets crawled further and further out of the town,
eating up the green country like greedy yellow caterpillars, but at
the foot of the Clover Hill they had to stop. For the owner of Clover
Hill would not sell any land at all—for any price that Fortunatus Rex
& Co. could offer. In vain the solicitors of the Company called on
the solicitors of the owner, wearing their best cloaks and swords and
shields, and took them out to lunch and gave them nice things to eat
and drink. Clover Hill was not for sale.

At last, however, a little old woman all in grey called at the
Company’s shining brass and mahogany offices and had a private
interview with the King himself.

“I am the owner of Clover Hill,” said she, “and you may build on all
its acres except the seven at the top and the fifteen acres that go
round that seven, and you must build me a high wall round the seven
acres and another round the fifteen—of _red_ brick, mind; none of your
cheap yellow stuff—and you must make a brand new law that any one who
steals my fruit is to be hanged from the tree he stole it from. That’s
all. What do you say?”

The King said “Yes,” because since his trouble he cared for nothing but
building, and his royal soul longed to see the green Clover Hill eaten
up by yellow brick caterpillars with slate tops. He did not at all like
building the two red brick walls, but he did it.

Now, the old woman wanted the walls and the acres to be this sort of
shape—


But it was such a bother getting the exact amount of ground into the
two circles that all the surveyors tore out their hair by handfuls, and
at last the King said, “Oh bother! Do it this way,” and drew a plan on
the back of an old Act of Parliament. So they did, and it was like
this—

              +---+---+
              | 1 | 2 |
  +---+---+---+---+---+
  | 13| 14| 15| I | 3 |
  +---+---+---+---+---+
  | 12| II|III| IV| 4 |
  +---+---+---+---+---+
  | 11| V | VI|VII| 5 |
  +---+---+---+---+---+
  | 10| 9 | 8 | 7 | 6 |
  +---+---+---+---+---+


The old lady was very vexed when she found that there was only one
wall between her orchard and the world, as you see was the case at the
corner where the two 1’s and the 15 meet; but the King said he couldn’t
afford to build it all over again and that she’d got her two walls as
she had said. So she had to put up with it. Only she insisted on the
King’s getting her a fierce bull-dog to fly at the throat of any one
who should come over the wall at that weak point where the two 1’s join
on to the 15. So he got her a stout bull-dog whose name was Martha, and
brought it himself in a jewelled leash.

“Martha will fly at any one who is not of kingly blood,” said he. “Of
course she wouldn’t dream of biting a royal person; but, then, on the
other hand, royal people don’t rob orchards.”

So the old woman had to be contented. She tied Martha up in the
unprotected corner of her inner enclosure and then she planted little
baby apple trees and had a house built and sat down in it and waited.

And the King was almost happy. The creepy, crawly yellow caterpillars
ate up Clover Hill—all except the little green crown on the top, where
the apple trees were and the two red brick walls and the little house
and the old woman.

The poor Queen went on seeing to the jam and the pickles and the
blanket washing and the spring cleaning, and every now and then she
would say to her husband—

“Fortunatus, my love, do you _really_ think Miss Fitzroy Robinson is
trustworthy? Shall we ever see our Daisy again?”

And the King would rumple his fair hair with his hands till it stuck
out like cheese straws under his crown, and answer—

“My dear, you must be patient; you know we had the very highest
references.”

Now one day the new yellow brick town the King had built had a
delightful experience. Six handsome Princes on beautiful white horses
came riding through the dusty little streets. The housings of their
chargers shone with silver embroidery and gleaming glowing jewels, and
their gold armour flashed so gloriously in the sun that all the little
children clapped their hands, and the Princes’ faces were so young and
kind and handsome that all the old women said: “Bless their pretty
hearts!”

Now, of course, you will not need to be told that these six Princes
were looking for the six grown-up Princesses who had been so happy at
the Select Boarding Establishment. Their six Royal fathers, who lived
many years’ journey away on the other side of the world, and had not
yet heard that the Princesses were mislaid, had given Miss Fitzroy
Robinson’s address to these Princes, and instructed them to marry the
six Princesses without delay, and bring them home.

But when they got to the Select Boarding Establishment for the
Daughters of Respectable Monarchs, the house was closed, and a card was
in the window, saying that this desirable villa residence was to be
let on moderate terms, furnished or otherwise. The wax fruit under the
glass shade still showed attractively through the dusty panes. The six
Princes looked through the window by turns. They were charmed with the
furniture, and the refining touch of a woman’s hand drew them like a
magnet. They took the house, but they had their meals at the Palace by
the King’s special invitation.

King Fortunatus told the Princes the dreadful story of the
disappearance of the entire Select School; and each Prince swore by
his sword-hilt and his honour that he would find out the particular
Princess that he was to marry, or perish in the attempt. For, of
course, each Prince was to marry one Princess, mentioned by name in his
instructions, and not one of the others.

The first night that the Princes spent in the furnished house passed
quietly enough, so did the second and the third and the fourth, fifth
and sixth, but on the seventh night, as the Princes sat playing
spilikins in the schoolroom, they suddenly heard a voice that was not
any of theirs. It said, “Open up Africa!”

The Princes looked here, there, and everywhere—but they could see no
one. They had not been brought up to the exploring trade, and could not
have opened up Africa if they had wanted to.

“Or cut through the Isthmus of Panama,” said the voice again.

Now, as it happened, none of the six Princes were engineers. They
confessed as much.

“Cut up China, then!” said the voice, desperately.

“It’s like the ghost of a Tory newspaper,” said one of the Princes.

And then suddenly they knew that the voice came from one of the pair of
globes which hung in frames at the end of the schoolroom. It was the
terrestrial globe.

“I’m inside,” said the voice; “I can’t get out. Oh, cut the
globe—anywhere—and let me out. But the African route is most
convenient.”

Prince Primus opened up Africa with his sword, and out tumbled half a
Professor of Magic.

“My other half’s in there,” he said, pointing to the Celestial globe.
“Let my legs out, do——”

But Prince Secundus said, “Not so fast,” and Prince Tertius said, “Why
were you shut up?”

“I was shut up for as pretty a bit of parlour-magic as ever you saw in
all your born days,” said the top half of the Professor of Magic.

“Oh, you were, were you?” said Prince Quartus; “well, your legs aren’t
coming out just yet. We want to engage a competent magician. You’ll do.”

“But I’m not all here,” said the Professor.

“Quite enough of you,” said Prince Quintus.

“Now look here,” said Prince Sextus; “we want to find our six
Princesses. We can give a very good guess as to how they were lost; but
we’ll let bygones be bygones. You tell us how to find them, and after
our weddings we’ll restore your legs to the light of day.”

“This half of me feels so faint,” said the half Professor of Magic.

“What are we to do?” said all the Princes, threateningly; “if you don’t
tell us, you shall never have a leg to stand on.”

“Steal apples,” said the half Professor, hoarsely, and fainted away.

They left him lying on the bare boards between the inkstained desks,
and off they went to steal apples. But this was not so easy. Because
Fortunatus Rex & Co. had built, and built, and built, and apples do not
grow freely in those parts of the country which have been “opened up”
by speculative builders.

So at last they asked the little Prince Denis where he went for apples
when he wanted them. And Denis said—

“The old woman at the top of Clover Hill has apples in her seven acres,
and in her fifteen acres, but there’s a fierce bulldog in the seven
acres, and I’ve stolen all the apples in the fifteen acres myself.”

“We’ll try the seven acres,” said the Princes.

“Very well,” said Denis; “You’ll be hanged if you’re caught. So, as I
put you up to it, I’m coming too, and if you won’t take me, I’ll tell.
So there!”

For Denis was a most honourable little Prince, and felt that you must
not send others into danger unless you go yourself, and he would never
have stolen apples if it had not been quite as dangerous as leading
armies.

So the Princes had to agree, and the very next night Denis let himself
down out of his window by a knotted rope made of all the stockings his
mother had knitted for him, and the grown-up Princes were waiting under
the window, and off they all went to the orchard on the top of Clover
Hill.

They climbed the wall at the proper corner, and Martha, the bulldog,
who was very wellbred, and knew a Prince when she saw one, wagged her
kinked tail respectfully and wished them good luck.

The Princes stole over the dewy orchard grass and looked at tree after
tree: there were no apples on any of them.

Only at last, in the very middle of the orchard there was a tree with a
copper trunk and brass branches, and leaves of silver. And on it hung
seven beautiful golden apples.

So each Prince took one of the golden apples, very quietly, and off
they went, anxious to get back to the half-Professor of Magic, and
learn what to do next. No one had any doubt as to the half-Professor
having told the truth; for when your legs depend on your speaking the
truth you will not willingly tell a falsehood.

They stole away as quietly as they could, each with a gold apple in
his hand, but as they went Prince Denis could not resist his longing
to take a bite out of his apple. He opened his mouth very wide so as
to get a good bite, and the next moment he howled aloud, for the apple
was as hard as stone, and the poor little boy had broken nearly all his
first teeth.

He flung the apple away in a rage, and the next moment the old woman
rushed out of her house. She screamed. Martha barked. Prince Denis
howled. The whole town was aroused, and the six Princes were arrested,
and taken under a strong guard to the Tower. Denis was let off, on the
ground of his youth, and, besides, he had lost most of his teeth, which
is a severe punishment, even for stealing apples.

The King sat in his Hall of Justice next morning, and the old woman and
the Princes came before him. When the story had been told, he said—

“My dear fellows, I hope you’ll excuse me—the laws of hospitality are
strict—but business is business after all. I should not like to have
any constitutional unpleasantness over a little thing like this; you
must all be hanged to-morrow morning.”

The Princes were extremely vexed, but they did not make a fuss. They
asked to see Denis, and told him what to do.

So Denis went to the furnished house which had once been a Select
Boarding Establishment for the Daughters of Respectable Monarchs. The
door was locked, but Denis knew a way in, because his sister had told
him all about it one holiday. He got up on the roof and walked down
the schoolroom chimney.

There, on the schoolroom floor, lay half a Professor of Magic,
struggling feebly, and uttering sad, faint squeals.

“What are we to do now?” said Denis.

“Steal apples,” said the half-Professor in a weak whisper. “Do let my
legs out. Slice up the Great Bear—or the Milky Way would be a good one
for them to come out by.”

But Denis knew better.

“Not till we get the lost Princesses,” said he, “now, what’s to be
done?”

“Steal apples I tell you,” said the half-Professor, crossly; “seven
apples—there—seven kisses. Cut them down. Oh go along with you, do.
Leave me to die, you heartless boy. I’ve got pins and needles in my
legs.”

Then off ran Denis to the Seven Acre Orchard at the top of Clover Hill,
and there were the six Princes hanging to the apple-tree, and the
hangman had gone home to his dinner, and there was no one else about.
And the Princes were not dead.

Denis climbed up the tree and cut the Princes down with the penknife of
the gardener’s boy. (You will often find this penknife mentioned in
your German exercises; now you know why so much fuss is made about it.)

The Princes fell to the ground, and when they recovered their wits
Denis told them what he had done.

“Oh why did you cut us down?” said the Princes, “we were having such
happy dreams.”

“Well,” said Denis, shutting up the penknife of the gardener’s boy,
“of all the ungrateful chaps!” And he turned his back and marched off.
But they ran quickly after him and thanked him and told him how they
had been dreaming of walking arm in arm with the most dear and lovely
Princesses in the world.

“Well,” said Denis, “it’s no use dreaming about _them_. You’ve got your
own registered Princesses to find, and the half-Professor says, ‘Steal
apples.’”

“There aren’t any more to steal,” said the Princes—but when they
looked, there were the gold apples back on the tree just as before.

So once again they each picked one. Denis chose a different one this
time. He thought it might be softer. The last time he had chosen the
biggest apple—but now he took the littlest apple of all.

“Seven kisses!” he cried, and began to kiss the little gold apple.

Each Prince kissed the apple he held, till the sound of kisses was like
the whisper of the evening wind in leafy trees. And, of course, at the
seventh kiss each Prince found that he had in his hand not an apple,
but the fingers of a lovely Princess. As for Denis, he had got his
little sister Daisy, and he was so glad he promised at once to give her
his guinea-pigs and his whole collection of foreign postage stamps.

“What is your name, dear and lovely lady?” asked Prince Primus.

“Sexta,” said his Princess. And then it turned out that every single
one of the Princes had picked the wrong apple, so that each one had a
Princess who was not the one mentioned in his letter of instructions.
Secundus had plucked the apple that held Quinta, and Tertius held
Quarta, and so on—and everything was as criss-cross-crooked as it
possibly could be.

And yet nobody wanted to change.

Then the old woman came out of her house and looked at them and
chuckled, and she said—

“You must be contented with what you have.”

“We _are_,” said all twelve of them, “but what about our parents?”

“They must put up with your choice,” said the old woman, “it’s the
common lot of parents.”

“I think you ought to sort yourselves out properly,” said Denis; “I’m
the only one who’s got his right Princess—because I wasn’t greedy. I
took the smallest.”

The tallest Princess showed him a red mark on her arm, where his little
teeth had been two nights before, and everybody laughed.

But the old woman said—

“They can’t change, my dear. When a Prince has picked a gold apple that
has a Princess in it, and has kissed it till she comes out, no other
Princess will ever do for him, any more than any other Prince will ever
do for her.”

While she was speaking the old woman got younger and younger and
younger, till as she spoke the last words she was quite young, not more
than fifty-five. And it was Miss Fitzroy Robinson!

Her pupils stepped forward one by one with respectful curtsies,
and she allowed them to kiss her on the cheek, just as if it was
breaking-up day.

Then, all together, and very happily, they went down to the furnished
villa that had once been the Select School, and when the half-professor
had promised on his honour as a Magician to give up Magic and take to
a respectable trade, they took his legs out of the starry sphere, and
gave them back to him; and he joined himself together, and went off
full of earnest resolve to live and die an honest plumber.

“My talents won’t be quite wasted,” said he; “a little hanky-panky is
useful in most trades.”

When the King asked Miss Fitzroy Robinson to name her own reward for
restoring the Princesses, she said—

“Make the land green again, your Majesty.”

So Fortunatus Rex & Co. devoted themselves to pulling down and carting
off the yellow streets they had built. And now the country there is
almost as green and pretty as it was before Princess Daisy and the six
parlour-boarders were turned into gold apples.

“It was very clever of dear Miss Fitzroy Robinson to shut up that
Professor in those two globes,” said the Queen; “it shows the
advantage of having lessons from the best Masters.”

“Yes,” said the King, “I always say that you cannot go far wrong if you
insist on the highest references!”



