CHAPTER XXXI. THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW


IT WAS a great delight to Diamond when at length Nanny was well enough
to leave the hospital and go home to their house. She was not very
strong yet, but Diamond’s mother was very considerate of her, and took
care that she should have nothing to do she was not quite fit for. If
Nanny had been taken straight from the street, it is very probable she
would not have been so pleasant in a decent household, or so easy to
teach; but after the refining influences of her illness and the kind
treatment she had had in the hospital, she moved about the house just
like some rather sad pleasure haunting the mind. As she got better, and
the colour came back to her cheeks, her step grew lighter and quicker,
her smile shone out more readily, and it became certain that she would
soon be a treasure of help. It was great fun to see Diamond teaching
her how to hold the baby, and wash and dress him, and often they laughed
together over her awkwardness. But she had not many such lessons before
she was able to perform those duties quite as well as Diamond himself.

Things however did not go well with Joseph from the very arrival of
Ruby. It almost seemed as if the red beast had brought ill luck with
him. The fares were fewer, and the pay less. Ruby’s services did indeed
make the week’s income at first a little beyond what it used to be, but
then there were two more to feed. After the first month he fell lame,
and for the whole of the next Joseph dared not attempt to work him. I
cannot say that he never grumbled, for his own health was far from what
it had been; but I can say that he tried to do his best. During all
that month, they lived on very short commons indeed, seldom tasting meat
except on Sundays, and poor old Diamond, who worked hardest of all, not
even then--so that at the end of it he was as thin as a clothes-horse,
while Ruby was as plump and sleek as a bishop’s cob.

Nor was it much better after Ruby was able to work again, for it was
a season of great depression in business, and that is very soon felt
amongst the cabmen. City men look more after their shillings, and their
wives and daughters have less to spend. It was besides a wet autumn, and
bread rose greatly in price. When I add to this that Diamond’s mother
was but poorly, for a new baby was coming, you will see that these were
not very jolly times for our friends in the mews.

Notwithstanding the depressing influences around him, Joseph was able to
keep a little hope alive in his heart; and when he came home at night,
would get Diamond to read to him, and would also make Nanny produce her
book that he might see how she was getting on. For Diamond had taken her
education in hand, and as she was a clever child, she was very soon able
to put letters and words together.

Thus the three months passed away, but Mr. Raymond did not return.
Joseph had been looking anxiously for him, chiefly with the desire of
getting rid of Ruby--not that he was absolutely of no use to him, but
that he was a constant weight upon his mind. Indeed, as far as provision
went, he was rather worse off with Ruby and Nanny than he had been
before, but on the other hand, Nanny was a great help in the house, and
it was a comfort to him to think that when the new baby did come, Nanny
would be with his wife.

Of God’s gifts a baby is of the greatest; therefore it is no wonder that
when this one came, she was as heartily welcomed by the little household
as if she had brought plenty with her. Of course she made a great
difference in the work to be done--far more difference than her size
warranted, but Nanny was no end of help, and Diamond was as much of a
sunbeam as ever, and began to sing to the new baby the first moment he
got her in his arms. But he did not sing the same songs to her that he
had sung to his brother, for, he said, she was a new baby and must have
new songs; and besides, she was a sister-baby and not a brother-baby,
and of course would not like the same kind of songs. Where the
difference in his songs lay, however, I do not pretend to be able to
point out. One thing I am sure of, that they not only had no small share
in the education of the little girl, but helped the whole family a great
deal more than they were aware.

How they managed to get through the long dreary expensive winter, I can
hardly say. Sometimes things were better, sometimes worse. But at last
the spring came, and the winter was over and gone, and that was much.
Still, Mr. Raymond did not return, and although the mother would have
been able to manage without Nanny now, they could not look for a place
for her so long as they had Ruby; and they were not altogether sorry for
this. One week at last was worse than they had yet had. They were almost
without bread before it was over. But the sadder he saw his father and
mother looking, the more Diamond set himself to sing to the two babies.

One thing which had increased their expenses was that they had been
forced to hire another little room for Nanny. When the second baby came,
Diamond gave up his room that Nanny might be at hand to help his mother,
and went to hers, which, although a fine place to what she had been
accustomed to, was not very nice in his eyes. He did not mind the change
though, for was not his mother the more comfortable for it? And was
not Nanny more comfortable too? And indeed was not Diamond himself more
comfortable that other people were more comfortable? And if there was
more comfort every way, the change was a happy one.




